Title: AMEC Shanghai Stock Exchange Company Profile
URL: https://star.sse.com.cn/star/en/marketdata/snapshot/c/5542484.shtml
Source Type: html
Domain: star.sse.com.cn
Content Type: text/html
Search Query: China semiconductor self-sufficiency policy 2026 AI chips

688012 | SHANGHAI STOCK EXCHANGE

Advanced Micro-Fabrication Equipment Inc. China
Advanced Micro-Fabrication Equipment Inc. China (AMEC, stock code: 688012) is an innovative global micro-fabrication equipment company serving customers in the semiconductor industry and adjacent high-tech sectors. We provide state-of-the-art equipment, process expertise, and stellar support to customers in front-end semiconductor manufacturing, back-end wafer level packaging, LED production, MEMS applications, and other semiconductor fabrication processes. AMEC is an entrenched supplier of dielectric and TSV etch tools, helping chipmakers build devices at process nodes as low as 5nm. In addition, AMEC's MOCVD tools are deployed in volume production by leading global manufacturers of LEDs and power devices with dominant position in GaN LED MOCVD market in 2018. AMEC products are deployed today by technology leaders in countries/regions like Mainland China and Taiwan, Singapore, Korea, Japan, Germany, Italy and Russia.
All information contained herein is provided by the underlying company itself and is for informational purposes only, and nothing contained herein should be construed as investment advice, either on behalf of a particular security or an overall investment strategy. The Shanghai Stock Exchange does not guarantee its accuracy and reliability and shall under no circumstance be responsible or liable for any error or for any loss directly or indirectly arising from any inaccuracy or omission or from any decision, action or non-action based on or in reliance upon the information herein.
Users may view and download the information herein for personal and non-commercial use free of charge subject to the laws of the People's Republic of China and the Legal Statement. No part of the information herein may be copied, downloaded, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any means, rented, displayed, performed, reproduced, photocopied, altered, sold, broadcast, published or otherwise in whole or in part in any manner for commercial purposes, without the prior written consent of the Shanghai Stock Exchange.
Users are hereby reminded that the Legal Statement represents your legally binding agreement with the Shanghai Stock Exchange. By accessing or using this website, you are also signifying your agreement with and acceptance of all the contents in the Legal Statement. The Shanghai Stock Exchange reserves the right to amend and interpret the Legal Statement.
Support ©2019 SHANGHAI STOCK EXCHANGE. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.