Title: ASML 2025 Annual Report
URL: https://ourbrand.asml.com/m/71076aaad607de4d/original/asml-2025-annual-report-based-on-us-gaap.pdf
Source Type: pdf
Domain: ourbrand.asml.com
Content Type: application/pdf
Search Query: China semiconductor self-sufficiency policy 2026 AI chips

[PDF page 66] Strategic (continued) The semiconductor industry can be cyclical, and we may be adversely affected by any downturn We derive most of our revenues from the sale of a relatively small number of products Failure to adequately protect intellectual property could harm our business The semiconductor industry has historically been cyclical. As a supplier to the global semiconductor industry, we are subject to its business cycles. The timing, duration and volatility are difficult to predict and can have a significant impact on semiconductor equipment manufacturers including ASML. Newer entrants to the industry, including Chinese semiconductor manufacturers, could increase the risk of cyclicality in the future. Certain key end-market customers – Logic and Memory – exhibit different levels of cyclicality and different business cycles. Cyclicality may be worsened by the geopolitical situation – for example, if countries increase semiconductor capacity for higher levels of self- sufficiency, thereby creating global overcapacity. Sales of our lithography systems, services and other holistic lithography products depend in large part on the level of capital expenditures by semiconductor manufacturers. These in turn are influenced by industry cycles, the drive for technological sovereignty and a range of competitive and other factors, including semiconductor industry conditions and prospects. The timing and magnitude of capital expenditures of our customers also impact the available production capacity of the industry to produce chips, which can lead to imbalances in the supply and demand. Reductions or delays in capital expenditures by our customers, or incorrect assumptions by us about our customers’ capital expenditures, could adversely impact our business. We make various assumptions about future demand in our financial models and our capital expenditures and planning for production capacity. To the extent that actual results prove to be materially different from our assumptions, we may have overcapacity, capacity constraints, or may have allocated capital expenditure and resources to make products that are not in demand by customers (at the expense of products that are in demand) and our actual results could differ substantially from those implied by our financial models. Capital expenditures by our customers may not continue at current levels and may decline. Capital expenditures by some customers have declined compared to prior years and we have experienced changes in timing of orders from certain customers, and we are subject to uncertainty in future customer demand. The global economic environment, including inflation, interest rates and geopolitical events, contributes to this uncertainty. An uncertain global economy frequently leads to reduced consumer and business spending, and could cause our customers to decrease, cancel or delay their orders – and we have experienced customers scaling back their capacity additions. High interest rates and volatility in financial markets could make it more difficult for our customers to raise capital, whether debt or equity, to finance their purchases of equipment, including the products we sell. The foregoing could lead to reduced demand, which may adversely affect our product sales and revenues and may harm our business and operating results. As we have significantly increased our organization in previous years in terms of employees, infrastructure, manufacturing capacity and other areas, it would be difficult to adjust our costs adequately in a timely manner in the event of an industry downturn. If we are unable to adapt appropriately and in a timely manner to changes resulting from macroeconomic conditions, our business, financial conditions or results of operations may be materially and adversely affected. We derive most of our revenues from the sale of a relatively small number of lithography systems (327 units in 2025, 418 units in 2024 and 449 units in 2023). As a result, the timing of shipments and recognition of system sales for a particular reporting period, as a result of shipment delays or other factors, may have a material impact on our results of operations in that period, and this impact is greater as prices for our systems increase. In recent years, we have used fast shipments for some customers, which allows us to deliver systems more quickly by having some final testing and formal acceptance carried out on customer sites instead of at our own facilities. This typically leads to a delay of revenue recognition for those shipments until formal customer acceptance, which can impact comparability of our results of operations from period to period. In addition, our installed base revenues are impacted by the number of systems we sell, and other factors; for example, customers may perform more of these services themselves, find other third-party suppliers to provide them, or we may be limited by export control restrictions. We rely on intellectual property (IP) rights such as patents, copyrights and trade secrets to protect our proprietary technology. However, we face the risk of such protective measures proving inadequate and we could suffer material harm because, among other matters: 1. IP laws may not sufficiently support our proprietary rights or may change adversely in the future. 2. Our agreements (e.g. confidentiality, licensing) with our customers, employees and technology development partners and others to protect our IP may not provide sufficient protection or may be breached or terminated. 3. Patent rights may not be granted or interpreted as we expect. 4. Patent rights will expire, which may result in key technology becoming widely available, which may harm our competitive position. 5. The steps we take to prevent misappropriation or infringement of our proprietary rights may not be successful. 6. IP rights can be difficult to enforce in countries where the application and enforcement of the laws governing such rights may not have reached the same level compared with other jurisdictions where we operate. 7. Third parties may be able to develop or obtain patents for our own or for similar competing technology. Legal proceedings may be necessary to enforce our IP rights and the validity and scope may be challenged by others. Any such proceedings may result in substantial costs and diversion of management resources, and, in the event of decisions unfavorable to us in proceedings, could result in significant costs or have a significant impact on our business. We have experienced and may in the future experience misappropriation attacks by third parties or our employees, including theft of IP. Such incidents may result in third parties or others, without authorization, obtaining, copying, using or disclosing our IP, despite our efforts to protect our rights. Our suppliers face similar risks which could have a consequential impact on us. STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE SUSTAINABILITY FINANCIALS ASML Annual Report 2025 66 At a glance Q&A with the CEO Our business Financial performance Risk and security Risk factors (continued)
[PDF page 21] The semiconductor market again saw strong double-digit growth with the same drivers as last year: advanced Logic and DRAM for AI continued to lead. The NAND market did have a short correction but later in the year strongly recovered, again driven by AI demand by hyperscalers. The lithography market showed double-digit growth where China remained stronger than initially expected, not only for lithography but for the full wafer fab equipment market. We anticipate continued growth in the semiconductor market driven by strong demand for AI logic and memory products, along with high pricing resulting from supply- demand imbalances. This is expected to drive demand for growth in the equipment market. Factors that may impact our business – as explained in more detail over the next few pages – include: 1. Macroeconomic and geopolitical trends 2. Megatrends 3. Semiconductor industry market developments 4. The forces impacting our strategy What’s happening At the start of the year global GDP growth for 2025 was expected to be 3.3%, slightly above the 2024 growth of 3.2%. Driven by the dynamic geopolitical environment (including tariff negotiations), the macroeconomic outlook fluctuated throughout the year. The latest forecast suggests growth of 3.2%1, while 2024 growth has been revised up to 3.3%. A slowdown in GDP growth is typically not a tailwind for a strong semiconductor cycle. The very high growth of demand for AI chips, however, drove the overall semiconductor market in 2025 to double- digit growth. Toward the end of the year, both DRAM and NAND demand increasingly outstripped supply, leading to a strong pricing environment and a good basis for further capacity expansion in 2026. Other markets that drive leading-edge semiconductors such as smartphones and PCs saw moderate growth as expected. The introduction of edge AI on these devices will drive additional memory content. The industrial and automotive markets started to recover but at a slow pace. The current global GDP outlook for 2026 points to a continued gradual recovery of these end markets. What it means for ASML Our EUV business saw growth in both EUV 0.55 NA and EUV 0.33 NA. Growth for EUV 0.33 NA was driven by the strong demand in advanced Logic and DRAM in support of the build out of the AI infrastructure. For EUV 0.55 NA, we recognized revenue for four systems that were shipped to customers’ R&D facilities. For non-EUV, sales were at a similar level as in 2024. Sales were primarily driven by our China mainstream business. We are working closely with our customers and suppliers to optimize our output capability and manage the risks. Our macroeconomic and geopolitical risks are part of our risk management process. Read more in Risk and security – How we manage risk What’s happening Semiconductors are crucial to the economic and strategic development of countries and regions – and the importance of the industry is only likely to grow. Many governments are pushing for ‘technological sovereignty’ to ensure security of supply, resilience and technological leadership in semiconductor technologies and applications – fueling capital expenditure. Countries and regions are also prioritizing AI sovereignty – the ability to independently develop, deploy and govern AI technologies. This drives the need to develop and train local AI models which require additional data center hardware with leading-edge silicon. What it means for ASML As governments increasingly see semiconductor manufacturing as strategically significant, chips acts are incentivizing our customers to build manufacturing facilities in the US, Europe and Asia. We share our views with governments, and we work closely with our customers to build the required ecosystem in these new regions – while retaining our focus on supporting established regions. External factors such as the timing of subsidies and the risk of restrictions make forecasting market demand less predictable. STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE SUSTAINABILITY FINANCIALS ASML Annual Report 2025 21 At a glance Q&A with the CEO Our business Financial performance Risk and security Our marketplace The macro headlines in 2025 were dominated by tariff dynamics, resulting in a downward revision of the 2025 global gross domestic product (GDP) forecast in April. As the year progressed, the outlook was adjusted upward, returning to the level prior to the tariff announcements. Global GDP growth was 3.2%1 for 2025, slightly below 2024 GDP growth. As in 2024, geopolitical volatility remained high, and AI dominated the news and spending in the semiconductor ecosystem. 1 Source: IMF World Economic Outlook, October 2025 1. Macroeconomic and geopolitical trends Global geopolitics – technological and AI sovereignty Economic outlook
[PDF page 22] What’s happening Our business is subject to global export control laws and regulations. Key developments in 2025 were the following: • NL Export Controls: Effective January 15, 2025, the Netherlands expanded its export control regulations to include an additional group of semiconductor manufacturing equipment, primarily certain metrology and inspection systems. These items now require an export license when shipped abroad. • US Export Controls: On October 1, 2025, the US Department of Commerce introduced the Affiliates Rule, expanding Entity List restrictions to include entities that are at least 50% owned by listed parties. While this rule would have affected a limited number of our business partners, its implementation has been suspended for one year, until November 10, 2026, as part of a trade agreement with China. As a result, the rule currently has no impact on our business operations. • China’s Rare Earth Controls: In 2025, China introduced new rules: it restricted exports of certain rare earth elements, limited technology sharing for processing them and extended these rules to products made abroad if they include any rare earth elements or technology. We began preparing for these restrictions in early 2024, with a focus on magnets used in our systems. A dedicated team continues to monitor regulatory developments and supplier risks, supported by mitigation plans already in place. To date, no material impact on customers has been observed. As part of a trade agreement with the US, China has suspended its export restrictions on rare earth materials for one year, until November 10, 2026. Existing risk mitigation measures for rare earth materials will remain in place. • EU Export Controls: In November 2025, the European Union incorporated certain Dutch national controls into the EU Control List, extending to all EU member states a license requirement for specific semiconductor manufacturing equipment. This includes advanced systems such as our DUV immersion lithography systems when exported outside the EU. For ASML this did not mean a change as these products already required an export license from the Netherlands. What it means for ASML Changes in export controls may have a material impact on our business for example on the sales volume, mix and timing. We are committed to complying with all applicable laws and regulations, including export control legislation in the countries where we operate, while continuing to develop our technology and serve customers. We aim to work with global customers to deliver lithography and metrology systems not impacted by export control restrictions or sanctions. We share relevant dynamics with governments to foster understanding of potential impacts of current and future measures. We require every ASML employee to follow policies designed to ensure compliance and prevent unauthorized transactions. We have implemented controls for compliance with export control and sanctions requirements and remain committed to enhancing and making our compliance framework more intuitive and easier to navigate. Connected world • Artificial intelligence • Hyperconnectivity • Cloud infrastructure • Internet of Things Climate change and resource scarcity • Energy transition • Electrification and smart mobility • Agricultural innovation • Smarter use of limited resources Social and economic shifts • Working and learning remotely • Healthcare and medical tech • Technological and AI sovereignty • Automation The world is changing fast, and semiconductors are a key enabler to help solve some of humanity's toughest challenges. In 2025, we continued to see very strong growth in AI, enabled by leading- edge semiconductor solutions, both in advanced Logic and AI-related DRAM. AI requires leading-edge, high-performance processor chips and a significant increase in DRAM chips compared to traditional compute architectures. It also stimulates the mainstream market, as AI requires large amounts of data collected via sensors which can be used to further drive robotics and workflow automation. The continuing convergence of wireless communication, telecoms, media and cloud technology via connected devices is driving demand for advanced semiconductors across the globe. Growing populations, urbanization, the energy transition and electrification to support smart mobility are increasing demand for advanced electronic devices. STRATEGIC REPORT CORPORATE GOVERNANCE SUSTAINABILITY FINANCIALS ASML Annual Report 2025 22 At a glance Q&A with the CEO Our business Financial performance Risk and security Our marketplace (continued) 1. Macroeconomic and geopolitical trends (continued) Global geopolitics – export controls 2. Megatrends Key megatrends impacting the semiconductor marketplace
[PDF page 58] Trend information Looking to 2026, we expect full-year revenue between €34 billion and €39 billion and gross margin between 51% and 53%. This outlook has strengthened significantly in the final months of 2025, mainly due to the anticipated increase and acceleration of capacity expansion plans by our advanced Logic and DRAM customers to meet the strong end-market demand driven by AI. Looking at market segments, we expect Logic-related revenues to remain strong and Memory revenues to be significantly higher compared to 2025. We anticipate our EUV revenue to be significantly higher, driven by advanced node ramps. Our non-EUV revenue is expected to be similar to 2025. With our net service and field option sales, we expect another year of growth, primarily due to increasing service revenue from our growing EUV installed base and our customers’ plans for productivity upgrades. We have been preparing for growth, and our capacity planning is continuing while we work with our supply chain to support a multi-year ramp. Our expectations and guidance for the first quarter of 2026 can be summarized as follows: • Total net sales between €8.2 billion and €8.9 billion • Gross margin between 51% and 53% • R&D costs of around €1.2 billion • SG&A costs of around €0.3 billion. The trend