Title: The Best Water Stocks to Watch | IG International
URL: https://www.ig.com/en/trading-strategies/what-are-the-top-water-stocks-and-etfs-to-watch--230810
Source Type: html
Domain: ig.com
Content Type: text/html; charset=UTF-8
Search Query: China smart water management companies listed stock performance

The Best Water Stocks to Watch | IG International

What are the top water stocks and ETFs to watch?
What you need to know about the water industry
What moves the markets for water company stocks?
The Athens Water Supply & Sewerage Co (EYP)
Thessaloniki Water Supply & Sewage (EYAPS)
Water industry: regulated vs unregulated
Stable businesses suited to long-term investors
Explore the markets with our free course
CFDs are complex instruments. 70% of retail client accounts lose money when trading CFDs, with this investment provider. You can lose your money rapidly due to leverage. Please ensure you understand how this product works and whether you can afford to take the high risk of losing money. CFDs are complex instruments. 70% of retail client accounts lose money when trading CFDs, with this investment provider. You can lose your money rapidly due to leverage. Please ensure you understand how this product works and whether you can afford to take the high risk of losing money.
Explore the ins and outs of the water industry and learn about the top water stocks and ETFs from around the world.
Water is crucial to every country in the world, but each one manages their resources differently. Historically, water has been owned and managed by the state to ensure citizens have access at the right price.
However, many countries have gradually turned to the private sector after realising public ownership was not delivering the funding for the innovation needed to tackle the growing challenges of the market. Privatisation may have put a vital commodity into the hands of profiteering business, but it has also provided greater investment and a faster pace of development.
Some nations have embraced privatisation more than others. For example, England’s entire market is privatised while governments in countries like France, Spain and India still manage some of their own water supplies. Some prefer to let private companies manage the whole network while others prefer private-public partnerships. Understanding the regulatory environment of each country is just as important as understanding the investment case for each stock.
Once you have your strategy and have decided how you’d like to trade, you can open an account with us to get started. Or, if you want to test your strategy risk-free, then try our demo account .
But, remember that all trading incurs significant risks. Always ensure that you can afford to take the risk of losses before opening a position.
Water exchange traded funds (ETFs) use the power of pooled funds to invest in a wide selection of water-related companies. Here, we look at five water ETFs that have performed well over the past 48 months.
*Based on the 48 months preceding 18 August 2021
The Invesco Water Resources ETF is based on the Nasdaq OMX US Water Index. This index attempts to track the performance of exchange-listed US companies involved in water purification and conservation products for homes, businesses and industries. The fund invests at least 90% of its total assets in common stocks, American depositary receipts (ADRs) and global depositary receipts (GDRs).
The First Trust Water ETF is based on the ISE Clean Edge Water Index. The index is weighted by market capitalisation, and tracks the top 36 companies that derive a substantial portion of their revenues from the potable and wastewater industry.
The Invesco Global Water ETF is based on the Nasdaq OMX Global Water Index, and generally invests at least 90% of its total assets in companies listed on a global exchange. These companies, much like Invesco’s US-focused water ETF, create products designed to conserve and purify water for homes, businesses and industries.
The Invesco S&P Global Water Index ETF is based on the S&P Global Water Index. The index’s constituents comprise of water utility, infrastructure, equipment and material companies. Generally, the fund invests at least 90% of its total assets in securities, American depositary receipts (ADRs) and global depositary receipts (GDRs).
The iShares Global Water UCITS ETF is based on the S&P Global Water Index, and offers broad exposure to companies related to water. It has made direct investments in the top 50 global water companies and aims to track their performance. This means it, like other water ETFs, has the stability of a water stock but with less risk because of its diversification.
These are the largest publicly traded water stocks from the UK, US, Europe and Asia.
Severn Trent is a listed UK water company serving around 4.5 million homes and 8 million customers across the Midlands. The company operates within the catchment areas of two of Britain's largest rivers – the Severn and the Trent, which is where its name comes from. The company has vowed to have the lowest water bills in England and Wales until at least 2025.
Severn Trent’s business services division gives it exposure to higher growth and unregulated markets in the UK and Ireland.
United Utilities is the UK’s largest listed water and wastewater company, and serves over 3 million homes and 200,000 businesses in the North West of England. Around half of the water it supplies to customers comes from Cumbria and Wales, with the rest taken from the River Dee. The company is also the 'largest corporate landowner in England' with 56,000 hectares under its belt. Its wholesale arm maintains reservoirs and water treatment works across the region.
Pennon Group is the smallest but most diverse of the three water stocks listed in London. Its core water and sewerage businesses are offered through South West Water and Bournemouth Water. These serve about 1.7 million people (mostly in Cornwall, Devon and Dorset) and 160,000 businesses. However, it also owns Viridor, a recycling business that manages about 7 million tonnes of waste each year, which it either recycles or sends to its energy recycling facilities that turn it into electricity.
Viridor is a unique gem in the Pennon crown. The business serves over 150 local authorities but is nowhere near as regulated as the core water unit. This means Pennon has better growth opportunities through recycling and a very reliable water business acting as a backbone.
American Water Works is by far the largest publicly-listed water company in the US. It provides drinking water, wastewater and other related services to more than 14 million people in 46 states, making it one of the most geographically diverse suppliers in the country.
It has a substantial military services group, which owns and operates water and wastewater systems on domestic US military sites.
Essential Utilities, formerly known as Aqua America, operates in eight US states: Pennsylvania, Ohio, North Carolina, Illinois, Texas, New Jersey, Indiana and Virginia. It provides water utility services to around 3 million people and wastewater services to another 250,000.
The company has grown over the years through acquisition, having made over 370 purchases since 1995. In fact, the 28 acquisitions made between 2016 and 2018 alone helped drive more than a 5% lift in customer growth.
Pentair is a US-listed business but operates in 30 countries worldwide, with headquarters in London. Its activities are broad, from treating residential water to supplying valves, smart products and filtration systems.
The company decided last year to become a pure play water company by separating out its other business activities. It separated its water and electrical businesses into two industry-leading public companies, with the water business retaining the Pentair name and the electrical business spun off into nVent Electric.
American States Water owns the Golden State Water Company and the electricity-supply arm named American States Utility Services. Its water operations serve around 260,000 homes in California while its electricity supply arm serves 24,000 homes and business.
It also has another unit that operates, maintains and constructs services for water distribution, wastewater collection and treatment facilities located on military bases throughout the country.
Watts Water Technologies is not a utility water provider. Instead it’s an engineer and global supplier of products and services that help with plumbing, drainage, flow control and water quality. Its products are used in all types of buildings.
It generates around 60% of its revenue in the US with the rest coming from overseas sales. The supplier has 'historically generated free cash flows that exceed 100% of our income', giving it a greater ability to grow and reward shareholders.
Itron supplies smart networks, software, services, meters and sensors, which help utility companies and other firms operate critical infrastructure safely and securely. These are used not only in water networks, but also for electricity and gas, as well as other applications such as street lighting. The company has more than 8000 customers in over 100 countries, with a particularly strong presence in North America.
In recent years, Itron has benefitted from a shift toward higher-margi