Title: Geohazard Market Size, Growth & Analysis Report [2026-2034]
URL: https://www.fortunebusinessinsights.com/geohazard-market-105033
Source Type: html
Domain: fortunebusinessinsights.com
Content Type: text/html; charset=UTF-8
Search Query: China geological hazard monitoring market size forecast 2026

Geohazard Market Size, Growth & Analysis Report [2026-2034]

Geohazard Market Size, Share & Industry Analysis, By Service (Site Investigation, Risk Assessment, Modelling, and Others), By End-User (Oil & Gas, Marine, Residential & Commercial, Infrastructure, and Others), and Regional Forecast, 2026-2034
List of Key Companies in Geohazard Market
"Actionable Insights to Fuel Your Growth"
Last Updated: July 13, 2026 | Format: PDF | Report ID: FBI105033
To receive a sample report, please provide the following details:
The global geohazard market size was USD 811.87 million in 2025 and is projected to grow from USD 854.98 million in 2026 to USD 1,188.62 million by 2034 at a CAGR of 4.82% during the forecast period. Asia Pacific dominated the global market with a share of 30.44% in 2025.
A geohazard is a type of geological condition that poses possibilities to cause significant damage to over the surface structures. These geological conditions are formed over the years through the effect of environmental changes along with variations in lithological temperatures and pressures. Consequently, a combination of various technologies is required to assess, identify, and combat the geological problems before the setup of new infrastructures to mitigate any risks. The disaster management services utilize different data collection methods to correctly assess technical and social issues and reduce the impact of a wide range of geological hazards such as volcanic activities, tsunamis, earthquakes, landslides, and floods.
Download Free sample to learn more about this report.
In 2025, North America generated USD 193.75 million, contributing 24.36% to global market revenue, and is projected to grow to USD 202.48 million in 2026.
The Europe market accounted for USD 146.8 million in 2025, representing 18.46% of the global industry, and is expected to reach USD 153.98 million in 2026.
Asia Pacific recorded a market size of USD 242.06 million in 2025, capturing 30.44% of the global market share, and is projected to reach USD 252.05 million in 2026.
The US market is projected to reach USD 144.03 billion by 2026.
The Japan market is projected to reach USD 62.25 billion by 2026.
The sudden outbreak of COVID-19 across the globe significantly affected the financial conditions of various nations. Governments across the globe implemented stringent policies, such as national and state-level lockdowns, along with social distancing norms to limit the expansion of the virus. Consequently, countries experienced deterioration in investment opportunities owing to the shutdown of business operations along with cash deficits in industrial operations.
Moreover, the affected population is confined to certain facilities to contain the spread of viral infection across the general public. Besides, the ability of individuals and medical staff to cope with unnatural events was significantly hampered due to the pandemic conditions. Consequently, various organizations are striving to enhance their understanding to estimate the risk vulnerabilities of extreme climates and geohazards to infected individuals within restricted locations.
For instance, in June 2020, a funded initiative called CONVERGE under the University of Colorado Boulder, U.S., directed its special working group to assess the intensity and vulnerability of personnel against geological hazards during the pandemic. The group is also set to adopt various monitoring systems to examine and advance understandings for optimizing hazard-related preparations amid the COVID-19 pandemic.
Long-term Agreements by Major Organizations to Play a Pivotal Role
The geohazard market has observed the introduction of various short and long-term contracts to monitor the subsurface conditions. Various government and non-government organizations have undertaken initiatives to combat unforeseen problems. For instance, in January 2021, the Ministry of Road Transport & Highways (MoRTH), India, announced a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with the government-owned Defense Research and Development Organization (DRDO). The contract aims at enhancing the sustainable geohazard management capabilities to safeguard against the hostile impacts of problems, such as avalanches and landslides, on the national highways.
Rising Collaboration between Industry Players Will Stimulate the Geohazard Market Growth
Various types of data acquisitions and assessment techniques, such as remote sensing, database gathering, mapping software, and others, have gained significant traction in the global market. Numerous organizations have launched joint efforts to precisely undertake all data points to predict a seismic activity more accurately. For example, in December 2020, CGG announced a strategic partnership with TGS and PGS to establish a joint ecosystem to contact their subsurface multi-client data libraries. The partnership aims to boost their efficiencies by enabling single-point access to their data for effective search, visualization, and download of specific data.
Download Free sample to learn more about this report.
Download Free sample to learn more about this report.
Constant Evolution of End-user Industries to Propel the Market Growth
Various industry verticals need a significant planning procedure to enhance their preparedness against unforeseen geohazard events. The surveys and analysis are completed as a part of the initial study periods in these industries to ensure safe functions by correctly anticipating the geological conditions. For instance, in December 2020, a hydrocarbon industry giant, Equinor, announced its plans to invest about USD 343 million for the development of the oil & gas field in the North Sea. Consequently, the introduction of new projects and such increasing investments in the industry verticals will trail the boosting demand for geohazard services.
Rising Awareness and Concerns about Geohazards to Enhance Market Growth
Increasing awareness among individuals, businesses, and governments about the risks posed by geohazards, such as landslides, earthquakes, and others, has led to a greater focus on protecting lives, property, and infrastructure. Communities living in geohazard-prone areas are increasingly seeking solutions to mitigate these risks, driving demand for geohazard assessment, monitoring, and mitigation technologies and services.
Moreover, media coverage of geohazard events, such as major earthquakes or landslides, has raised public awareness about the potential consequences of geological hazards. Hence, businesses, governments, and infrastructure developers are increasingly recognizing the importance of incorporating geohazard risk assessments into their planning and decision-making processes, which includes assessing geological risks during site selection, conducting geotechnical studies for infrastructure projects, and implementing measures to enhance resilience against geohazards. Thus, the adoption of these processes in infrastructure projects due to rising awareness would proliferate the market over the forecast period.
Unanticipated Investment Decline and High Product Cost May Hamper Market Growth
The market has observed the installation of high-cost equipment such as sensors and receivers. Any defects in the operating tools can considerably result in erroneous studies along with generating high replacement or repair costs that could obstruct the market growth. Furthermore, the services are significantly complex and thus require substantial capital, which may dampen the pace.
Modeling Services to Gain Significant Momentum over the Forecast Period
Based on service, the market can be majorly categorized into site investigation, risk assessment, modeling, and others. The modeling segment is projected to experience a significant rise owing to its ability to integrate innovative methods to predict the susceptibility of any region and provide solutions to increase the resiliency of the structure.
Additionally, site inspection services are also widely utilized in the projects to perform feasibility analysis on geological deformities that may harm the final structure at sooner or later stages. Besides, risk assessment techniques are also one of the most crucial operations as they conclude the extent of consequences faced by the determined site over the project life. The risk assessment segment is expected to account for 32.43% of the market in 2026.
To know how our report can help streamline your business, Speak to Analyst
To know how our report can help streamline your business, Speak to Analyst
Oil & Gas Segment is Likely to Dominate the Global Market
Based on the end-users, this industry can be majorly divided into oil & gas, marine, residential & commercial, infrastructure, and others. The oil & gas segment is anticipated to lead the industry with a major share in the market. The discovery of new reserves, the establishment of advanced petrochemical complexes, and the introduction of new pipelines are among the major factors backing the segment growth. The increasing efforts