Title: 2024 Investment Climate Statements: United Arab Emirates
URL: https://www.state.gov/reports/2024-investment-climate-statements/united-arab-emirates/
Source Type: html
Domain: state.gov
Content Type: text/html; charset=UTF-8
Search Query: Abu Dhabi climate adaptation spending 2024

United Arab Emirates - United States Department of State

2024 Investment Climate Statements: United Arab Emirates
1. Openness To, and Restrictions Upon, Foreign Investment
12. U.S. International Development Finance Corporation (DFC), and Other Investment Insurance or Development Finance Programs
13. Foreign Direct Investment Statistics
Policies Towards Foreign Direct Investment
Limits on Foreign Control and Right to Private Ownership and Establishment
Laws and Regulations on Foreign Direct Investment
Foreign Trade Zones/Free Ports/Trade Facilitation
Performance and Data Localization Requirements
Capital Markets and Portfolio Investment
Americans in Colombia needing consular assistance can call the State Department 24/7: +1-202-501-4444 (abroad) or 888-407-4747 (U.S./Canada) | Enroll in STEP | Latest Alerts
The Government of the United Arab Emirates (UAE) continues to pursue economic diversification and regulatory reforms to promote private sector development, reduce dependence on hydrocarbon revenues, and build a knowledge economy buttressed by advanced technology and clean energy.
The UAE serves as a major trade and investment hub for the Middle East and North Africa, as well as increasingly for South Asia, Central Asia, and Sub-Saharan Africa. Multinational companies cite the UAE’s political and economic stability, excellent infrastructure, developed capital markets, and perceived absence of systemic corruption as factors contributing to the UAE’s attractiveness to foreign investors. The UAE seeks to attract foreign direct investment (FDI) and talent by i) not charging personal income taxes or restricting the repatriation of capital; ii) allowing relatively free movement into the country of labor and maintaining low barriers to entry (effective tariffs are five percent for most goods); and iii) offering FDI incentives.
In January 2024, the UAE Federal Cabinet established five economic priorities for 2024: increasing private sector employment opportunities for Emiratis; expanding housing for Emiratis; strengthening the education sector; growing the non-oil GDP; and improving sustainability. In July 2023, the UAE established a new federal Ministry of Investment to streamline and align investment policies of individual emirates under a unified investment strategy and to enhance the competitiveness of related policies and procedures. The Financial Action Task Force’s (FATF) removal of the UAE from its grey list in February 2024, after two years of the UAE strengthening its anti-money laundering and countering the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) legal and regulatory framework, marked an important milestone in the UAE’s drive to further improve its attractiveness as an investment destination.
The UAE continued to attract high net worth individuals, with approximately 4,500 moving to the country in 2023, according to media reports. Driven by this influx, and particularly by demand from Indian, British, and Russian nationals, Dubai’s property market remained strong in 2023. During 2023, a growing number of wealth managers and family offices based in China, Hong Kong, and Singapore established offices in Dubai, according to the Dubai Financial Services Authority (DFSA).
Over the past several years, the UAE federal government and the country’s seven constituent emirates have passed numerous initiatives, laws, and regulations to attract more foreign investment. Recent measures include visa reforms to attract and retain expatriate professionals, a drive to create new international economic partnerships, major investments in critical industries, and new policies to encourage Emirati entrepreneurship and labor force participation. In September 2023, the UAE introduced an optional savings program for private sector and free zone employees to contribute up to 25 percent of their income to an investment account and receive employer contributions of between 5.83 percent and 8.33 percent. In 2022, the UAE formally changed its work week for government employees and most corporate staff to Monday to Thursday with a half-day on Friday, more closely aligning with markets outside the region. The UAE’s landmark 2021 Data Protection Law, which developed the legal frameworks around data privacy, investment, regulation and legal protection of industrial property, copyrights, trademarks, and residency went into effect. However, the government has yet to issue regulations. Together, these economic development reforms offer both challenges and opportunities for foreign investors. While U.S. companies broadly consider these reforms to be positive, investors should carefully consider the implications on their particular operations.
The UAE’s Corporate Income Tax Law on business profits entered into force on June 1, 2023. The Federal Decree Law No. 47 of 2022 imposed a standard rate of nine percent on taxable profits exceeding $102,000. Marking the first imposition of corporate taxes in the country’s history, the law represented a significant change to the UAE tax landscape. It affects all businesses, including free zone entities, but exempts state-owned companies, extractive industries, pension funds, and investment funds.
In September 2023, the UAE issued Federal Decree Law No. 36 on the Regulation of Competition (the New Competition Law), to replace Federal Decree Law No. 4 of 2012. The New Competition Law extended its jurisdiction to include practices taking place overseas that affect the UAE market and expanded its definition to include the digital economy. The new law removed previous sectoral exemptions and clarified that government entities can only be exempted from the law by explicit government decisions. The New Competition Law broadened the interpretation of anti-competitive conduct and introduced new tests for mandatory merger controls based on the increased level of concentration in a given market.
The UAE announced a national policy in October 2021 of net zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050. To achieve this goal, the UAE announced planned investment of $163 billion in renewable energy and the establishment of a $30 billion climate finance fund. These steps were taken in conjunction with hosting the 28th UN Climate Change Conference of the Parties (COP28), which took place in Dubai in November-December 2023.
The UAE actively seeks FDI. In 2021, the government announced several programs with the goal of attracting $150 billion in foreign investment in the coming decade.
Under Federal Decree Law No. 26 of 2020, the “Commercial Companies Law,” onshore UAE companies are no longer required to have a UAE national or a Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) national as a majority shareholder. In addition, UAE joint stock companies are no longer required to be chaired by an Emirati citizen or have Emirati citizens make up the majority of their boards. Local branches of foreign companies are no longer required to have a UAE national, or a UAE-owned company, act as an agent. With the lifting of federal regulations on majority ownership of onshore businesses, individual emirates started publishing lists of eligible business activities for foreign investment. In March 2021, an intra-emirate committee recommended a list of strategically important sectors requiring additional licensing restrictions. The Abu Dhabi Department of Economic Development (ADDED) published in May 2021 a list of 1,105 commercial and industrial business activities that are eligible for 100 percent foreign ownership, effective June 2021. In reporting on new business licenses, ADDED does not provide disaggregated data, making it unclear how successful this reform has been in driving new foreign-owned businesses. In June 2021, the Dubai government published guidelines for full ownership procedures for more than 1,000 commercial and industrial activities.
The UAE Federal Law No (3) of 2022 on regulating commercial agencies came into effect in June 2023. The new law replaced the 1981 law, which generally required foreign companies to partner with an Emirati local agent to establish distribution operations of their products in the country. The new law allowed any international company to act as its own agent for its own products in new commercial endeavors. The new law also expanded the right to act as a commercial agent beyond UAE citizens and public joint stock companies with 51 percent national capital. Commercial arrangements predating 2013 remain subject to legacy arrangements with local UAE citizen commercial agents.
Non-tariff barriers to foreign investment persist in the form of UAE visa sponsorship and distributorship requirements. In an effort to ease these barriers, on March 5, Dubai’s General Directorate of Residency and Foreign Affairs (GDRFA) announced that it would reduce the number of documents required to complete visa transactions from 16 to five and limit the number of required visits to service centers to two. The GDRFA estimated this would reduce the process to secure visa sponsorship and distributorship approval from 30 days to jus