Title: UAE - Policies & action | Climate Action Tracker
URL: https://climateactiontracker.org/countries/uae/policies-action/
Source Type: html
Domain: climateactiontracker.org
Content Type: text/html; charset=utf-8
Search Query: Abu Dhabi climate adaptation spending 2024

Policies & action | Climate Action Tracker

RELEASE: EU slipping on action amid climate breakdown, aided by Germany
RELEASE: First four Article 6 country evaluations sobering
Press conference – Bonn Climate Change Conference 2026
Never let an energy crisis go to waste: government responses to the US-Isr…
RELEASE: Are governments letting another energy crisis go to waste?
Fossil fuel phase-out: how are governments doing?
Breaking the cycle of energy shocks: India’s renewable opportunity
Policies and action against modelled domestic pathways
NDC target against modelled domestic pathways
Policies and action against modelled domestic pathways
The CAT rates the UAE’s policies and actions as “Insufficient” when compared with modelled domestic emissions pathways. The “Insufficient” rating indicates that the UAE’s climate policies and action in 2030 need substantial improvements to be consistent with limiting warming to 1.5°C. If all countries were to follow the UAE’s approach, warming would reach over 2°C and up to 3°C.
The UAE’s policies and action rating has improved compared to our previous assessment for two reasons.
First, the UAE’s newly published current policy scenarios (included in its LTS) lead to 17% lower emissions by 2030. This scenario includes a sectoral breakdown and detailed information at the measure level. This is a significant improvement compared to our previous current policy scenarios which were based only on the implementation of the Energy Strategy 2050.
Second, the UAE’s 5 th National Communication to the UNFCCC also includes updated inventory data, which is 15% lower than our previous estimates, mainly due to differences in industrial process emissions and fugitive emissions. These also impact the absolute value estimated for the UAE’s 2030 emissions under current policies.
The UAE’s LTS, published in 2024, includes targets and current policy projections for all major sectors of the economy, and detail both existing and planned measures to achieve them. While this is a significant step in transparency, it also shows that the UAE plans to rely heavily on carbon capture and storage (CCS) technologies especially after 2030 and towards its 2050 target, which undermines the credibility of its climate policies and targets.
The CAT estimates the UAE’s 2030 emissions under current policies are set, in a best case scenario, to plateau close to 2022 levels, at around 214 MtCO 2 e, or continue to increase to about 259 MtCO 2 e. Under current policies, the UAE is set to miss its latest 2030 emissions reduction target. To meet its 2030 NDC target, the government needs to implement more ambitious policies and reduce its 2030 emissions by a further 15–40%. However, if the UAE implements the planned policies outlined in both its NDC and LTS, it could potentially reach its target. For more information, please see the Assumptions tab.
Since 2023, the UAE has published information on many relevant climate policies across all sectors of the economy. Both its NDC from 2023 and its LTS from early 2024 provide details on policies and action, both current and planned, in the power, industry, transport, buildings, agriculture and waste sectors (Government of the UAE, 2023a, 2024b).
This is a significant step in transparency, which allows for a better understanding of how the UAE plans to reduce its emissions to meet its NDC and net zero targets. However, it also shows a critical overreliance on carbon capture and storage both in the power and industry sectors, a smokescreen allowing the country to continue expanding its oil and fossil gas production and use while claiming to be on the way to net zero.
In recent years, the UAE has announced plans to invest in renewables both at home and abroad, including a USD 100bn commitment together with the United States (Associated Press, 2023). However, in parallel it continues to invest into fossil fuel production. The UAE is planning to significantly increase its oil production in the next years, and is pushing to reach “gas self-sufficiency”, with major investments in offshore gas production. In November 2022, ADNOC announced a USD 150bn investment plan to expand its oil and gas business in the next five years (The Guardian, 2023). As part of this plan, ADNOC awarded contracts worth USD 17bn in October 2023 for the Hail and Ghasha Offshore Development project. This project aims to produce 1.5 billion standard cubic feet per day (bscfd) of gas before the end of the decade (Reuters, 2023). For more details, see the Power sector section below.
The developments and the investment going towards new fossil fuel infrastructure are not consistent with limiting global warming to 1.5°C, instead are likely to lock the UAE into a high-emissions trajectory and undermine its transition towards renewable energy. Instead of ramping up its gas production towards self-sufficiency, the UAE should set out an ambitious plan to phase-out its dependency on gas for electricity and switch to renewables, which would reduce prices and price volatility for consumers, and avoid the risk of stranded assets (CAT, 2022).
The UAE’s power sector remains heavily reliant on fossil gas, which accounted for 72% of total electricity generation in 2023. This is followed by nuclear energy (20%) and renewables (8%) (Ember, 2025).
The UAE’s 2023 NDC update sets a target to reduce electricity emissions by 11% below 2019 levels by 2030. Under this sectoral target, emissions from electricity are expected to be ~68 MtCO 2 e in 2030 (Government of the UAE, 2023a). In its LTS, the UAE includes additional information on its power sector plan, including a demand forecast of 211 TWh by 2030 and a grid coefficient of 0.27 tCO 2 e/MWh, a 51% reduction from the 2019 baseline level of 0.55 tCO 2 e/MWh.
According to the UAE’s latest version of its Energy Strategy 2050, as well as its NDC and LTS, the 2030 target will be mostly achieved by expanding renewables and nuclear. However, the achievement of the 2050 target of a zero-emissions grid coefficient is expected to rely heavily on the use of CCS on gas power plants, instead of a plan to phase out fossil fuels from power generation.
CCS technologies are neither commercially viable nor proven at scale, despite large public subsidies for research and development globally. Heavily relying on unproven CCS for power generation simply prolongs the use of fossil fuels and increases emissions, diverting attention and resources away from the necessary and urgent switch to renewable energy generation that drives down actual emissions.
The use of CCS should be limited to industrial applications where there are fewer options to reduce process emissions—not to reduce emissions from the electricity sector where renewables are cost-effective mitigation alternatives, not least because CCS does not remove 100% of emissions from power plants.
The UAE has also announced an investment of USD 54 billion over the next seven years to support its updated energy targets. However, it remains unclear if the recently announced investment plan is additional to the USD 160 billion the country had previously announced to support its 2050 energy targets (Associated Press, 2023).
The UAE has taken steps to accelerate the deployment of renewable energy, mainly through large-scale investments into wind and solar. The share of electricity generated from renewables has increased in the past five years, going from 3% in 2019 to 8% in 2023 (Ember, 2025). While these efforts mark progress, the current pace of deployment remains slow and the related targets insufficient. As a result, we evaluate the UAE’s overall efforts to deploy renewable energy as “Slow Progress”.
As part of its energy strategy, the UAE is planning to expand its renewables capacity, mostly through solar power. The UAE plans to reach 19.8 GW of renewables installed capacity in 2030, with an expected 33 TWh of generation, up from 6 GW of total installed capacity in 2023 (Ember, 2025).
It also set out a target to produce at least 30% of its electricity through renewable sources by 2030. This falls significantly short of the CAT 1.5°C compatible benchmark for the UAE, which sets renewable power generation at 66% of the total by 2030 (Climate Action Tracker, 2023b; Government of the UAE, 2023b).
As part of its LTS, the UAE plans to roll out additional policies to support the deployment of renewable energy. These include CO 2 emissions targets or caps for power producers through regulators at the emirate level, incentives for distributed power generation such as net metering, installing PV solar in public buildings, and tariff revisions to facilitate load balancing (Government of the UAE, 2024b).
The UAE also continues to invest in large scale solar power and storage. With its current and planned renewable energy developments, the UAE is expected to reach 9 GW of renewable power by 2030. Following the construction of the ~1.2 GW Noor Abu Dhabi solar PV plant in 2019, the UAE has continued to develop utility scale PV p