Title: Water: building resilience – October 2024 - Savills
URL: https://www.savills.ae/research_articles/379881/367459-0
Source Type: html
Domain: savills.ae
Content Type: text/html; charset=utf-8
Search Query: UAE flood resilience projects 2024

United Arab Emirates | Water: building resilience – October 2024

Impacts – Why real estate needs to think differently
Menu > Find a service > Residential agency > Commercial property > Why Savills > Insight & opinion > Contact us
Subscribe to receive exclusive news and listings
Success! You are now subscribed to the Savills mailing list.
Market in Minutes: GB Farmland – Summer 2026
Developments to create thriving rural communities
Case study: Lower Otter restoration project
Cookies are a small file saved on your computer that help store preferences and other information that’s used on the web pages you visit. See below for further information about the categories of cookies used on our site and your current preference settings. Turning any of these cookies off may affect your experience of the site. For more information about how we and our partners use cookies on our site, see our Cookie Policy Save and close Allow all cookies
For more information about how we and our partners use cookies on our site, see our Cookie Policy Save and close Allow all cookies
For more information about how we and our partners use cookies on our site, see our Cookie Policy
Explore Savills property services by emirate, supported by specialist teams across the UAE.
Expert valuation services across the UAE, with dedicated teams in Dubai, Abu Dhabi, and Sharjah.
Get trusted advice from our property experts to help you buy, sell, lease, or invest in the UAE with confidence.
Buy, sell, rent or lease property across the UAE with our local teams.
Browse the latest off plan launches across Dubai, Abu Dhabi, Sharjah and Ras Al Khaimah.
Book a no obligation valuation with one of our local experts to understand what your property could be worth. Prefer virtual? We can do that too.
Browse developments where Savills leads sales as Master Agency.
Search offices, retail, and industrial property across the UAE, with expert guidance from Savills commercial teams.
Request a no-obligation commercial valuation from our specialist teams across the UAE.
Get trusted advice from a commercial specialist on buying, selling, leasing, or occupying property.
For over 170 years, we’ve helped people thrive through places and spaces. With more than 42,000 professionals dedicated to commercial and residential real estate across 70 countries, no matter where you are, we have the expertise to bring your vision to life.
We've grown a lot in 170 years. Through many economic cycles, we've become the international advisor of choice across every aspect of real estate.
We aim to make a positive impact on the communities in which we operate and on the environment, both directly, and through advisory work with our clients.
Our integrity, honesty and professionalism is what gives our clients, colleagues, investors and business partners the confidence to work with us.
Insight & Opinion is our hub for residential, commercial and industrial articles and research from experts offering industry-leading advice and analysis.
The latest regional and international property market opinions, plus helpful guides and top tips from our renowned industry experts.
Industry data and in-depth analysis of market performance, trends and forecasts across a full range of sectors and disciplines.
Up-to-the-minute news from our Press teams providing the latest developments within Savills Middle East and the wider international Savills business.
Read the latest edition of Impacts and discover the trends shaping the future of the real estate market.
With over 42,000 people working across 70 countries around the world, we'll always have an expert who is local to you.
Whatever your needs, we have someone who can help.
At Savills, our most valuable asset is our people. We pride ourselves in offering rewarding and challenging career opportunities to our employees, and attract and retain some of the top leaders in the industry.
In 2022, we published a Spotlight on water that focused on its role within agriculture; two years on, we look at the importance of integrated water management for the rural sector and how the sector can build resilience for the future
The UK will need over five billion extra litres of water per day by 2050 1 in order to support a growing population, food production and environmental protection. The importance of water cannot be overstated, with significant challenges to both quality and quantity.
Currently, water is managed separately between sectors; however, with a finite resource, the future must incorporate collaborative, innovative thinking to create an integrated water management approach.
In England, the need for an integrated approach has been embraced through the establishment and development of five water resources regional groups – Water Resources North, Water Resources West, Water Resources East, Water Resources South East and West Country Water Resources – with the aim of creating a multi-sector water resources plan.
The challenge to this approach has been that not all sectors (figure 1) have a water resources management plan, and not all sectors have appropriate funding. Scotland does not have a water resources strategy, which is something Scottish Land & Estates is championing.
Globally, a framework called the 'Integrated Water Resources Management' is being used, with 172 countries reporting on its implementation. However, progress is varied and often limited. Our case study from the Waste and Resources Action Programme (WRAP), see ' The water roadmap ', operates at a global level and looks at building water resilience for rural businesses and their supply chains.
There are three main factors driving water demand:
The global population is expected to grow to 9.3 billion (78 million in the UK) by 2050, which will drive demand for public water supply and for other sectors (figure 1). It is estimated a 70% increase in food production will be required, and thus, the associated water demand.
UN-Water 2 states that “climate change is primarily a water crisis”. We are seeing more frequent flooding, drought and water quality incidents. Figure 2 shows the variation in rainfall across the UK in a dry year (2018), wet year (2020) and in comparison to 2023. The government has made water quality and the protection of communities from flooding top priorities. Historically, there has been a lack of support for agriculture in relation to the impact of extreme weather conditions, and we wait to see whether this will change for the future.
The regulatory responsibility for water use falls to the Environment Agency (EA) in England, the Scottish Environment Protection Agency and Natural Resources Wales. Their role is to use enforcement where water quality standards are not met and manage sustainable abstraction for environmental protection and recovery. Additionally, Ofwat and the Drinking Water Inspectorate (DWI) regulate the water and sewerage sectors in England and Wales to ensure that the water companies provide a good quality service and independent reassurance that public water supplies are safe. Around 47 trillion litres of water is licensed from England’s natural resources every year, the equivalent to 18.8 million Olympic pools. Figure 3 shows 65% of the water abstracted in England comes from freshwater surface sources, 27% from tidal waters and 10% from groundwater sources.
The Environment Act 2021 gives the regulator the power to reduce or revoke abstraction licences where there is the potential of damage to the environment. Affected licence holders will need to seek an alternative source of water, and our advice to rural businesses is to make plans now. We would ask that the licensing system itself is reviewed, a recommendation echoed by the EA. A future system is needed where:
Water plays a crucial role across rural businesses. Savills 2,500-acre virtual estate (figure 4) highlights water usage across the estate that comprises several tenanted arable and dairy farms, one poultry business operating a number of sheds, 16 hectares of glasshouses, an average of three residential properties per farm, a farm café, let office space and a small commercial forestry operation. Built assets use significantly less water than the agricultural enterprises, e.g. cropping, but the water source will vary and demand may be met by green water, which we discuss on the following pages. As abstraction licences and weather patterns become more uncertain, the rural sector needs to develop solutions to secure water requirements for the future. Through the use of case studies, we explore some of the ways to reduce reliance on stressed water sources via nature-based solutions, technology and efficiency measures.
Do we feel that our ability to turn on a tap and water will appear has undervalued our precious resource? Toulouse in France certainly thinks so; the local authority has instigated an innovative solution to encourage water conservation. They will increase the cost of water to its inhabitants by 42% per m 3 in the summer months and reduce the winter cost by 30% per m 3 .
In