Title: 2024 United Arab Emirates' First Biennial Transparency Report
URL: https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/UAE%27s%20First%20BTR%20-%20Submission%20Document.pdf
Source Type: pdf
Domain: unfccc.int
Content Type: application/pdf
Search Query: Abu Dhabi climate adaptation spending 2024

2024 United Arab Emirates’ First Biennial Transparency Report
Acknowledgement The UAE’s Biennial Transparency Report was developed as part of the country’s continued efforts to enhance transparency and strengthen national climate governance in line with its commitments under the Paris Agreement. The report was prepared through a whole-of-society approach, utilizing the expertise and contributions of government entities, the private sector, and non-state actors. The Ministry of Climate Change and Environment (MOCCAE) expresses its sincere gratitude to all the entities and individuals for their contributions to the preparation of this report, which reflects the UAE’s collective efforts to enhance transparency and advance climate action Executive Leadership H.E Dr. Amna bint Abdullah Al Dahak Minister of Climate Change and Environment H.E. Mohammed Saeed Sultan Al Nuaimi Undersecretary of Ministry of Climate Change and Environment Project Management Team - Ministry of Climate Change and Environment H.E Dr. Alanoud Alhaj Al Ali Assistant Undersecretary of Green Development & Climate Change Sector Eng. Abdelmuti Ahmed Murad Director, Climate Change Department Technical Team Leads Eng. Aisha Mohamed Al Abdooli Director, Green Development & Environment Affairs Department Abdulla Mohammed Al Remeithi Division Director - Environment Policy Muwaffaq Bakr Al Khedery Principle Project Manager Angie Sanchez Piña Climate Change Specialist Fatma Mohammad Hokal Head of Industrial Sustainability Policy Management Section Fatima Sahib Ali Al Habshi Head of the Climate Change International Affairs Section Giannina Santiago Cabarcas Senior Advisor, Climate Task Force Abdulla Ahmed Al Hammadi Senior Principle, Strategic Relations Management Tala Suleiman Abu Shakair Senior Specialist, Climate Change Mayyada Ibrahim ALMarzooqi Climate Change Data Analyst
Institutional Contributors – Government and Semi-Government Entities Ministry of Industry and Advanced Technology Sharjah Electricity, Water, and Gas Authority Ministry of Foreign Affairs Ajman Municipality Ministry of Energy and Infrastructure Umm Al Quwain Municipality Ministry of Economy Ras Al-Khaimah Environmental Protection Authority Ministry of Finance Fujairah Environment Authority Ministry of Health and Prevention Emirates National Oil Company Ministry of Culture EMSTEEL Federal Competitiveness and Statistics Center Abu Dhabi National Oil Company General Civil Aviation Authority BEEAH Group Environmental Agency Abu Dhabi Emirates Aluminum Company Dubai Environment and Climate Change Authority Dubai Electricity and Water Authority
Table of Content Executive Summary 1 Chapter 1 9 A. National Circumstances, Institutional Arrangements and Cross-Cutting Information 10 B. Trends in GHG Emissions 29 C. Energy (CRT Category 1) 35 D. Industrial Processes and Product Use – IPPU (CRT Category 2) 61 E. Agriculture (CRT Category 3) 80 F. Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry (CRT Category 4) 92 G. Waste (CRT Category 5) 100 H. Recalculations and Improvements 114 I. Annexes to the National Inventory Report 115 Chapter 2 118 A. National Circumstances, Institutional Arrangements and Legal Frameworks 119 B. Description of the UAE’s NDC 131 C. Description of Indicator to Track Progress and Target 132 D. Use of Cooperative Approaches 133 E. Opportunities for Addressing Identified Gaps Related to Reporting on Estimates of Expected and Achieved GHG Emissions for Actions, Policies and Measures 133 F. Information on Progress Tracking in Implementing and Achieving NDC 134 G. Mitigation Policies and Measures, Actions and Plans 135 H. Annex to Tracking Progress Made in Implementing and Achieving the UAE’s NDC2.3 157 Chapter 3 158 A. National Circumstances, Institutional Arrangements and Legal Frameworks 159 B. Impacts, Risks and Vulnerabilities 168 C. Adaptation Priorities and Barriers 178 D. Adaptation Strategies, Policies, Plans, Goals and Actions to Integrate Adaptation into National Policymaking 181 E. Progress on Implementation of Adaptation 224 F. Monitoring and Evaluation of Adaptation Actions and Processes 227 G. Cooperation, Good Practices, Experience and Lessons Learned 229 Chapter 4 232 A. Information on Flexibilities 233 Annex 241 Abbreviations 244 References 251
1 Executive Summary
2 1. Background Information on Climate Change and its Impacts Greenhouse gases support insulation to maintain the Earth's temperature at a level suitable for life, however, human activities have increased their concentrations, amplifying global warming effects. The latest science has confirmed that the rise in global temperatures is intrinsically linked to a large influx of natural phenomenon, including, regional warming, heat waves, extreme variability in rainfall patterns, sea level rise, ocean acidification and is the driver for concurrent climate related natural disasters such as drought or flooding. In 2021, the United Arab Emirates (UAE) compiled the UAE State of Climate Report to better understand the potential implications of climate change on the region. Key considerations identified include the increase in heat waves, rising sea levels, increased intensity but lower frequency of rainfall, saltwater intrusion into freshwater wells, ocean acidification, and thermal stress in surface waters. These changes pose serious threats to ecosystems and natural landscapes, necessitating urgent and effective measures to mitigate their impacts and protect the environment. 2. Background Information on International Climate Action and Greenhouse Gas Inventories As scientific understanding of climate change grew, global efforts coalesced through the UNFCCC, leading to key agreements like the Kyoto Protocol and Paris Agreement—under which the UAE emerged as a regional leader by ratifying the Paris Accord and regularly submitting increasingly ambitious climate action plans (NDCs). The United Arab Emirates submitted its first NDC in 2015, followed by a second NDC in 2020 that introduced a more ambitious, economy-wide emissions reduction target. This second NDC was subsequently updated in 2022 and 2023. However, this report does not assess progress toward the commitments outlined in the 3rd NDC, as they fall outside the BTR reporting period. The Paris Agreement established the Enhanced Transparency Framework (ETF) to create a common transparency and accountability framework across all Parties, with regards to all pillars of climate action – namely mitigation, adaptation and means of implementation and support – while recognising the fundamental differences in capacity between developed and developing countries. Within this framework, the Biennial Transparency Report (BTR) constitutes the official reporting mechanisms from countries to inform the international community about its GHG emissions, the progress made in implementing NDCs, and the effectiveness of climate actions on adaptation and mobilization and provision of support. The BTR plays a crucial role in the international climate governance process by building trust amongst Parties that everyone is doing their part in tackling the global climate crisis. This report represents the UAE's unwavering commitment to addressing climate challenges and setting a regional benchmark for transparency and accountability. The BTR functions as a collective framework, providing insights into both the advancements and challenges faced by countries in their pursuit of the objectives set forth in the Paris Agreement. With updates occurring every two years, the BTR will serve as an essential tool for measuring progress and fostering continuous improvement in global climate efforts. As part of the BTR’s development process, chapter 1 has been designed as the National Inventory Report, accounting for all emissions and removals arising from activities in the Energy sector, Industrial Processes and Product Use (IPPU), Agriculture, Land-use, Land-use Change and Forestry (LULUCF) and Waste. Greenhouse gas inventories work to encapsulate the total release and capture of the primary gases responsible for the warming climate. In accordance with the UNFCCC, there exist seven registered greenhouse gases/groups that would need to be accounted for, for an inventory to be complete. The seven gases include Carbon Dioxide (CO2), Methane (CH4), Nitrous Oxide (N2O), all gases that fall under the classification of Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), all gases that fall under the classification
3 of Perfluorocarbons (PFCs), Sulphur Hexafluoride (SF6) and Nitrogen Trifluoride (NF3). As the purpose of collating the inventory is to better understand the warming potential of the released gases, each gas has been assigned a global warming potential (GWP), which is a value indicative of the potency for the absorption and re-radiation of heat. The UAE’s inventory has been developed with the GWPs prepared by the 5th Assessment Report (AR) released by the IPCC. In all assessment reports, the warming potential of CO2 has been assigned as 1