Title: From cause to consequence: examining the historic April 2024 ...
URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41612-025-01073-1
Source Type: html
Domain: nature.com
Content Type: text/html; charset=utf-8
Search Query: UAE flood resilience projects 2024

From cause to consequence: examining the historic April 2024 rainstorm in the United Arab Emirates through the lens of climate change | npj Climate and Atmospheric Science

From cause to consequence: examining the historic April 2024 rainstorm in the United Arab Emirates through the lens of climate change
An extreme rainfall event over the United Arab Emirates in April 2024: Role of dynamic and thermodynamic drivers
Future changes in the precipitation regime over the Arabian Peninsula with special emphasis on UAE: insights from NEX-GDDP CMIP6 model simulations
Buffering the impacts of extreme climate variability in the highly engineered Tigris Euphrates river system
Detection and attribution of climate change
Detection and attribution of anthropogenic climate change
Supplementary information (download DOCX )
Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles and JavaScript.
npj Climate and Atmospheric Science volume 8 , Article number: 183 ( 2025 ) Cite this article
In April 2024, the United Arab Emirates experienced unprecedented rainfall, triggering severe flooding and widespread disruption. Here we investigate the driving mechanisms, localized impacts, and potential influence of human-driven climate change on this extraordinary event. Our findings strongly suggest that anthropogenic climate change is amplifying the frequency of extreme events like that of 16 April 2024. The event was primarily fueled by the interaction of a potential vorticity streamer with an active Red Sea Trough, a powerful upper-level jet, and the advection of warm, moisture-laden air from a warmer Arabian Sea. High-resolution satellite data reveal a clear link between urbanization, population density, and the severity of flood impacts in major cities, alongside a remarkable greening of the desert that lingered into the summer months.
Subtropical regions are characterized by arid and semi-arid conditions featuring meager and irregular amounts of rainfall throughout the year. The dry conditions arise due to the large-scale subsidence associated with the subtropical anticyclones in the descending branch of the Hadley Cell, and the interaction between the monsoons and mid-latitude westerlies 1 . The mechanisms that drive precipitation events range from primarily extratropical forcing on the poleward side, in association with mid-latitude weather systems, to tropical forcing on the equatorward side, mostly driven by tropical disturbances 2 . One of the most prominent subtropical arid regions is the Arabian Peninsula, comprising the Rub’ Al Khali Desert that straddles over four countries: the United Arab Emirates (UAE), Oman, Yemen and Saudi Arabia. Here, most of the annual rainfall occurs in the colder months of November to April 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , even though in parts of southern Oman and Yemen precipitation totals are higher during boreal summer owing to the southwest monsoon flow over the Arabian Sea 7 . Extreme precipitation episodes are typically caused by tropical-extratropical interactions generally featuring the (i) Red Sea Trough (RST 8 , 9 ), a tongue of low pressure driven by both thermodynamic and dynamic forcing that lies over the Red Sea in spring (March to May, MAM) and autumn and shifts southwards into the Ethiopian Highlands in winter; (ii) atmospheric rivers 10 , narrow and long corridors of high moisture transport that originate in the tropics/subtropics and extend into mid- and high-latitudes; and (iii) mid-latitude baroclinic systems, including fronts and cut-off lows 11 , 12 . In addition, tropical cyclones originating from the Arabian Sea occasionally impact the Arabian Peninsula, bringing strong winds and torrential rainfall 13 .
On the eastern side of the Arabian Peninsula, organized convection, in the form of mesoscale convective systems (MCSs), is more frequent in the spring months of March and April. It is fueled by warm and moist low-level air advected from the Arabian Sea, Red Sea and/or the Arabian Gulf, the presence of a mid-level trough that promotes a conditionally unstable stratification, and a southward shift in the subtropical jet 14 . An example of a high-impact extreme weather event in the UAE driven by MCSs occurred on 9 March 2016, in which more than 240 mm of rain fell in Dubai, with winds of up to 35 m s −1 in Abu Dhabi 15 . All the aforementioned ingredients for the development of MCSs were present on this day, along with sea surface temperature (SST) anomalies of +1.5–2.5 K that could have also contributed to the extreme weather event. Springtime precipitation events have become more frequent and intense in the last couple of decades 14 , in line with a warming tendency 16 , 17 , raising the question of whether, and if yes to what extent, anthropogenic climate change played a role. The challenge and importance of performing detection and attribution of climate change was first emphasized by ref. 18 . The first study on this topic was published by ref. 19 , who investigated the anthropogenic contribution to the 2003 summer European heatwave. Through numerical simulations with and without anthropogenic forcings, the study concluded that human influence has at least doubled the risk of the summer temperature averaged over southern Europe exceeding the 1961–1990 mean by 1.6 K at the 90% confidence level. Since then, thousands of studies have been published, many confirming the role of human-induced climate change (e.g. ref. 19 , 20 ), while some did not reach conclusive results (e.g. ref. 21 ). For example 20 , found that anthropogenic emissions increased the likelihood of extreme precipitation events in northern-central France, taking the May/June 2016 flooding event as reference, by about a factor of two. On the other hand 21 , could not evidently attribute to human-induced climate change the highly impactful extratropical storms Eleanor and Friederike, which wreaked havoc over western Europe in January 2018 producing wind gusts in excess of 150 kph (42 m s -1 ). Detection and attribution of anthropogenic climate change is a required step to better understand the internal variability of the climate system and to develop effective adaptation and mitigation strategies 22 . As climate projections indicate an increased likelihood of extreme precipitation events, in particular in the UAE 23 , it is vital to understand the potential role of anthropogenic climate change in these episodes. In particular, a quantification of the latter will both enable more accurate estimations of projected climate changes and add urgency (and further motivate and encourage) the public and policymakers to the need to aggressively reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
In this work, the focus is on the recent extreme rainfall event of 16 April 2024 in the UAE, which brought record-breaking rainfall amounts to several parts of the country 24 . In particular, the 24 h rainfall totals exceeded 250 mm in some areas and were the highest since the records began in 1949, causing widespread flooding and disruption, with a total of 20 fatalities in Oman and 4 in the UAE 24 , 25 , 26 , 27 . Despite the low runoff, significant flooding occurred in the major urbanized areas, underscoring the complexities of urban hydrology and the challenges of flood forecasting in the region 26 . A rapid attribution study for this event has been conducted by the World Weather Attribution 28 . Even though the authors could not attribute the event to human-induced climate change, they found a historical precipitation event like that of 16 April 2024 is 20–30% more likely in the 2023/2024 climate compared to a 1.2 K cooler climate, with an intensity increase in the range 3-10%, both with a large uncertainty. The main objectives are to (i) understand the atmospheric processes leading to the observed precipitation amounts; (ii) investigate whether anthropogenic climate change made the extreme event more likely to occur and/or more intense and, if yes, quantify its contribution; and (iii) assess the impacts of the flooding rains on the major urban and desert areas in the country.
The main ingredients of the extreme event on 16 April 2024 are (i) a potential vorticity (PV) streamer that moved eastwards over the Arabian Peninsula (Fig. 1a–c ) with a cut-off in the 500 hPa geopotential height (Fig. 1d–f ). The colder mid-tropospheric temperatures promoted a conditionally unstable stratification that favoured the development of convection (Fig. 1d–f ); (ii) a low pressure system over the southeastern Arabian Peninsula, which developed from the interaction of an active RST with the upper-level trough from the mid-latitudes and a meridional wavetrain emanating from the tropical Indian Ocean (Fig. 1g–i ); (iii) advection of very moist air from the tropical Indian Ocean, promoted by a low-high pressure couplet with the Arabian subtropical anticyclone to the east of the aforementioned low pressure (Fig