Title: Dubai completes first phase of Dh500m stormwater drainage project ...
URL: https://www.thenationalnews.com/news/uae/2026/04/12/dubai-completes-first-phase-of-dh500m-stormwater-drainage-project-for-al-quoz/
Source Type: html
Domain: thenationalnews.com
Content Type: text/html; charset=utf-8
Search Query: UAE flood management budget by emirate

Dubai completes first phase of Dh500m stormwater drainage project for Al Quoz | The National

Dubai completes first phase of Dh500m stormwater drainage project for Al Quoz
Key infrastructure scheme is part of Dubai's long-term drive to strengthen its flood defences
Dubai completed phase one of a Dh500 million Al Quoz drainage upgrade, adding 14km of stormwater and 15km of sewerage networks. The works form part of Tasreef, a Dh30 billion programme to expand water drainage capacity by 700 per cent over 100 years. The project serves Al Quoz Industrial Areas 1–4 and zones between Sheikh Zayed Road and Al Khail Road, bolstering flood defences after severe 2024 rainfall. Marwan Ahmed bin Ghalita, director general of Dubai Municipality, says the scheme enhances infrastructure efficiency, resilience and operational readiness across the emirate. “This project contributes to enhancing the efficiency of the rainwater drainage system and the smooth flow of water,” said the Waste and Sewerage Agency chief executive.
Dubai on Sunday announced the completion of the first phase of a Dh500 million sewerage and stormwater drainage network, in support of a government drive to protect the emirate against floods .
The major infrastructure project in Al Quoz Creative Zone will serve communities across Al Quoz Industrial Areas 1, 2, 3, and 4, as well as a key area between Sheikh Zayed Road and Al Khail Road.
The first phase of the scheme – in which Dh250 million was invested – included the construction of stormwater drainage systems extending 14 kilometres and sewerage networks covering 15km.
UAE weather: Alert issued with heavy rain expected in Abu Dhabi and Dubai
The upgrade work is part of the wider Tasreef scheme, a Dh30 billion plan to bolster the emirate's water drainage unveiled by Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid , Vice President and Ruler of Dubai, after the country experienced widespread flooding caused by unprecedented rainfall in April 2024.
The UAE faced further storms at the end of March – although not as severe as two years previous – which caused travel disruption and flooded roads across the Emirates.
“The Sewerage and Stormwater Network Development Project in Al Quoz is one of Dubai Municipality’s key strategic projects to enhance the efficiency, resilience, and operational readiness of the emirate’s infrastructure systems," said Marwan Ahmed bin Ghalita, director general of Dubai Municipality.
Adel Al Marzouqi, chief executive of the Waste and Sewerage Agency at Dubai Municipality, said the initiative was crucial to Dubai's efforts to safeguard itself against extreme weather.
“This project contributes to enhancing the efficiency of the rainwater drainage system and the smooth flow of water in the Al Quoz Creative Zone, while reducing water accumulation," he said.
"This ensures the continuity of services and business operations and supports the city’s resilience and preparedness to face various future climatic conditions.”
In June 2025, Dubai Municipality completed a Dh277m sewerage and rainwater drainage network in Nad Al Sheba, which spans a total of 24km and adds 11km of household connections to Dubai's main sewerage system.
An advanced pumping station was installed, which can handle 4,000 litres of water per second, complemented by a 31km gravity-based drainage pipeline network, which will maintain system readiness during periods of heavy rainfall and mitigate flooding risks.
The strategic project, due to be completed in 2033, is a continuation of drainage projects launched by Dubai in 2019, covering the Expo Dubai area, Al Maktoum International Airport City and Jebel Ali.
The new projects will serve vital areas including Nad Al Hamar, and around Dubai International Airport, Garhoud, Rashidiya, Al Quoz, Zabeel, Al Wasl, Jumeirah and Al Bada’a.
The system aims to increase rainwater drainage capacity by 700 per cent, meet the emirate’s needs for 100 years and ensure the city is ready to face “climate-related challenges”.
UAE weather: Alert issued with heavy rain expected in Abu Dhabi and Dubai
Rain in Abu Dhabi and Dubai, with thunder and lightning to come
Cristiano Ronaldo marries partner Georgina Rodriguez in Portugal
Cristiano Ronaldo’s race to 1,000 goals: When will Al Nassr star hit historic milestone?
My Dubai Salary: From Dh690 per month to Dh40,000, but I want $1 million per day
Moody's considers ratings downgrade for Dubai-based Binghatti amid Iran war fallout
Dubai completed phase one of a Dh500 million Al Quoz drainage upgrade, adding 14km of stormwater and 15km of sewerage networks.
The works form part of Tasreef, a Dh30 billion programme to expand water drainage capacity by 700 per cent over 100 years.
The project serves Al Quoz Industrial Areas 1–4 and zones between Sheikh Zayed Road and Al Khail Road, bolstering flood defences after severe 2024 rainfall.
Marwan Ahmed bin Ghalita, director general of Dubai Municipality, says the scheme enhances infrastructure efficiency, resilience and operational readiness across the emirate.
“This project contributes to enhancing the efficiency of the rainwater drainage system and the smooth flow of water,” said the Waste and Sewerage Agency chief executive.
Flooding along the Kadra Road near Shawqa Village in Ras Al Khaimah. Antonie Robertson / The National Show caption: Flooding along the Kadra Road near Shawqa Village in Ras Al …
Flooding near Al Dhaid along the S142 Highway. Antonie Robertson / The National Show caption: Flooding near Al Dhaid along the S142 Highway. Antonie Rober…
Flooding near Al Dhaid in Sharjah. Antonie Robertson / The National Show caption: Flooding near Al Dhaid in Sharjah. Antonie Robertson / The N…
The Kadra Road near Shawqa Village in Ras Al Khaimah. Antonie Robertson / The National Show caption: The Kadra Road near Shawqa Village in Ras Al Khaimah. Antoni…
Umm Suqeim Street in Dubai. The National Show caption: Umm Suqeim Street in Dubai. The National
Umm Suqeim Street in Dubai. The National Show caption: Umm Suqeim Street in Dubai. The National
Umm Suqeim Street in Dubai. The National Show caption: Umm Suqeim Street in Dubai. The National
This scooter needed to be pushed through the water in Dubai. The National Show caption: This scooter needed to be pushed through the water in Dubai.…
Many roads in Dubai were flooded. The National Show caption: Many roads in Dubai were flooded. The National
A residential street in Umm Suqeim. The National Show caption: A residential street in Umm Suqeim. The National
Dark clouds cast a shadow over Abu Dhabi. Victor Besa / The National Show caption: Dark clouds cast a shadow over Abu Dhabi. Victor Besa / The …
Cars make their way through the water in Khalifa City in the capital. Victor Besa / The National Show caption: Cars make their way through the water in Khalifa City in the…
Drainage operations under way central in Abu Dhabi. Victor Besa / The National Show caption: Drainage operations under way central in Abu Dhabi. Victor B…
Residents walk through the water in care feet in Abu Dhabi. Victor Besa / The National Show caption: Residents walk through the water in care feet in Abu Dhabi. …
Water on the road outside the Springs Souk on Al Khamila Street in Dubai. Antonie Robertson / The National Show caption: Water on the road outside the Springs Souk on Al Khamila Str…
Outside the Springs Souk on Al Khamila Street in Dubai. Antonie Robertson / The National Show caption: Outside the Springs Souk on Al Khamila Street in Dubai. Anto…