Title: Flying Quieter and Cleaner
URL: https://www.olcf.ornl.gov/2024/08/12/flying-quieter-and-cleaner/
Source Type: html
Domain: olcf.ornl.gov
Content Type: text/html; charset=UTF-8
Search Query: Whisper-Prop drone noise reduction technology cost

Flying Quieter and Cleaner – Oak Ridge Leadership Computing Facility

Start-up aerospace company Whisper Aero uses Summit to test its novel concepts for an ultraquiet electric airplane
From quieter airplanes to quieter leaf blowers
Stunning Science, Future of Computing Showcased at 2026 OLCF User Summit
Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Cleveland Clinic model chemistry of fusion reactor material
From a nondescript industrial building in the small town of Crossville, Tennessee, the team of engineers at Whisper Aero is planning a revolution in aviation technology.
Previously home to a publisher of magazines — including, coincidentally, Trade-A-Plane , an airplane sales publication started in 1937 — the long-empty property’s cavernous spaces are now filled with multidisciplinary activities that include the creation of a new electric aircraft engine.
In January 2024, employees of the 3-year-old start-up moved into their new headquarters, refurbishing its dusty rooms into a 21st century aerospace technology facility with areas for R&D prototyping, testing, manufacturing and shipping. In the old pressroom where massive printing machinery once stood tall, the disjointed sections of a 140-foot-long wind tunnel now await reassembly. A Minnesota bicycle company donated the wind tunnel to Tennessee Technological University, which now owns the building and is converting it into an advanced mobility business incubator, leasing 40,000 of the 130,000 square feet available to Whisper Aero.
Whisper Aero says its eQ160 electric ducted fan propulsor is at least 100 times quieter and 20% more efficient overall than those of its competitors. Image: Carlos Jones/ORNL
The start-up’s propulsion innovation is an advanced electric ducted fan, or EDF, intended to replace the traditional fossil-fuel-burning engines used on most aircraft. Compared to the most efficient jet engines available today, current EDFs can offer at least a 5 to 10% improvement in propulsive efficiency at speeds of 200 to 400 knots. Whisper Aero claims that its patented design offers key breakthroughs over current state-of-the-art EDFs, namely a very high blade-count fan operating with blade-passage frequencies that are pushed into the ultrasonic range beyond human hearing. According to the company’s tests, its EDFs are at least 100 times quieter and 20% more efficient overall than those of its competitors. Additionally, its engineers say the novel features of their EDFs allow them to achieve 92% aerodynamic efficiency, independent of size.
The company is refining its own vision for a nine-passenger electric airplane called the Whisper Jet. Simulations performed on the Summit supercomputer at the Department of Energy’s Oak Ridge National Laboratory are enabling the firm to dramatically accelerate the design of a novel, integrated system of its unique EDFs for the Whisper Jet that is substantially quieter and cleaner than traditional airplane engines.
The Whisper Jet integrates 20 to 30 small, quiet electric ducted fans into the leading edge of its wings. This arrangement forms a “jetfoil” integration of distributed electric propulsion to propel the plane without generating any emissions. Image: Whisper Aero
Rather than use a few large turbofan or open-propeller engines that emit noise and carbon dioxide, the Whisper Jet integrates 20 to 30 small, quiet EDFs into the leading edge of its wings. This arrangement forms a “jetfoil” integration of distributed electric propulsion, or DEP, to propel the plane without generating any emissions. According to the company’s projections, using electric airplanes for all U.S. domestic flights under 1,000 miles would reduce aviation-related annual greenhouse gas emissions by 40% — or 80 million tons.
Whisper Aero CEO Mark Moore, a NASA engineer for 32 years who pioneered DEP aircraft design at NASA Langley Research Center, foresees a future of decarbonized regional airlines that offer shorter, less expensive flights by small DEP airplanes — or electric vertical takeoff and landing aircraft. Whisper Aero’s EDF also has possibilities for national defense, such as electric drones that could fly 100 times quieter than current models. And even super-quiet leaf blowers that are already on their way into production.
Whisper Aero CEO Mark Moore was a NASA engineer for 32 years who pioneered distributed electric propulsion aircraft design at NASA Langley Research Center. image: Carlos Jones/ORNL
“The fundamental premise of Whisper Aero is that we are changing the objective function of the aircraft design from minimizing gross weight to minimizing the acoustic impact. Noise is one of the most complex analysis problems that exist,” said Moore, who co-founded ­­the company with Ian Villa, COO and chief product officer. “And in the DEPframework, we are bringing together the acoustics along with the wing, the propulsion and the control into a much more complex design.”
In addition to its rows of EDF propulsors, the Whisper Jet’s other defining feature is its outboard horizontal tail. Unlike the tails of traditional airplanes that provide downforce, the Whisper Jet’s tail works with its jetfoil wings to provide lift.
“While the idea for the outboard horizontal tail has been around since World War II, only now do we have the tools to really understand and optimize these kinds of unique configurations,” Moore said. “Instead of being isolated disciplines where a wing provides lift and a jet engine provides the thrust, we’re at a stage where they can all merge. It’s all one thing, and that’s just not how we designed aircraft before.”
Devon Jedamski, Whisper Aero’s chief engineer, added:
“You can design an incredibly quiet fan, but if you integrate it in a bad way, it’s not going to be quiet. When you have interactions with multiple fans and the airframe, creating dynamic and unsteady events, it’s a very, very complex analysis problem that requires extensive computational fluid dynamics simulations, which can be done only on large-scale supercomputers.”
If Whisper Aero was going to make progress on the Whisper Jet’s ambitious design, it needed access to far more computing capability than it had available in house.
Whisper Aero’s engineering team turned to the Oak Ridge Leadership Computing Facility, a DOE Office of Science user facility located at ORNL, for its robust computing power. Through a competitive proposal process, they were awarded time on Summit, the nation’s fourth-fastest supercomputer at 200 petaflops. Access to Summit and its GPU, or graphics processing unit, architecture gave the company’s researchers a tenfold speedup in compute times compared to its in-house CPU-only systems and enabled advanced simulations via a unified approach that wasn’t previously possible.
Vineet Ahuja is Whisper Aero’s head of flight sciences and an associate fellow at the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. Image: Carlos Jones/ORNL
“Using Summit affords us the possibility of expanding the scope of Whisper’s design and analysis activities that benefits aircraft control and aeropropulsive integration,” said Vineet Ahuja, Whisper Aero’s head of flight sciences and an associate fellow at the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, or AIAA. “As a result, aerodynamic design has shown an incredible turnaround time relative to where we were just a few years back in our pre-Summit days. This speedup ultimately benefits vehicle development cycle times, which are reduced by over 20%.”
Whisper Aero’s CFD, or computational fluid dynamics, engineers began their Summit research by modeling a drone with an outboard tail architecture that is similar to that of the Whisper Jet and powered by a podded EDF propulsor. In aircraft design, CFD simulations predict how air will flow around the model of a particular concept — its lift and drag — which provides clues to optimizing its aerodynamic performance. The team primarily used NASA’s FUN3D suite of CFD tools that can model everything from aircraft aerodynamics to propulsion to aeropropulsive integration. On Summit, the team was able to run complete simulations in an afternoon that typically would have taken a week on commercial high-performance computing, or HPC, systems.
“CFD simulations allow us to understand the pros and cons of various types of integration. But the design space is so large that only with access to a computer like Summit could we tackle the problem,” said Vinod Lakshminarayan, the Whisper Aero CFD engineer who performed much of the computational work on Summit. “With so many available GPU nodes, we were able to explore a lot more design parameters compared to what we could have done on another cluster in the same time frame.”
Whisper Aero conducted computational fluid dynamics simulations on Summit of their electric drone design, aeropropulsive integration, and airframe design and analysis. Image: Whisper Aero
The team’s simulation studies of EDF design, aeropropulsive integration, and airframe design and analysis for their novel drone were accomplished in under three mon