Title: FLASH FLOODS: RISK ASSESSMENT AND MITIGATION
URL: https://www.isec-society.org/ISEC_PRESS/EURO_MED_SEC_05/pdf/RAD-04.pdf
Source Type: pdf
Domain: isec-society.org
Content Type: application/pdf
Search Query: UAE climate change flood risk assessment

Proceedings of International Structural Engineering and Construction, 11(2), 2024 Developing Materials and Structures for Sustainable Engineering Edited by Gribniak, V., Rimkus, A., Holschemacher, K., Quapp, U., Singh, A., and Yazdani, S. Copyright © 2024 ISEC Press ISSN: 2644-108X www.doi.org/10.14455/ISEC.2024.11(2).RAD-04 RAD-04-1 FLASH FLOODS: RISK ASSESSMENT AND MITIGATION SOUGHAH ALSAMAHI1, HAZEM GOUDA1, SANA AMIR1, and ASDAM ALGHEZAWI2 1School of Engineering, Univ of Wollongong in Dubai, Dubai, United Arab Emirates 2Ministry of Energy and Infrastructure, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates Company In recent years, United Arab Emirates has experienced several flash flood events and extreme cyclonic events that resulted in flooding various parts of the country. This in return raised concerns on the preparedness of the infrastructure to such events considering the damage caused by them. Roads were blocked from the excessive rainfall water leading to heavy traffic jams, houses were drowned and cars were swept away. Therefore, an in-depth study was performed on a selected area of interest in the city of Ras Al-Khaimah (UAE) to explore the risks associated with flash flood events and to propose solutions for flood management. Hydrological and hydraulic models were used to simulate precipitation runoffs and calculate flood magnitudes in order to plan and design new flood control and hydraulic structures. Using the output of the hydrologic and hydraulic models, a dam and a protection channel were proposed as possible solutions to resolve flood issues in the selected area. It was concluded that with proper hydrologic modelling, flash floods can be managed to a great extent and damage to the infrastructure can be minimized. It is even more important in context of climate change that such modelling techniques should be part of urban planning and design of infrastructure drainage systems for areas that are prone to heavy rainfall and floods. Keywords: Climate change, Rainfall, Infrastructure, Drainage system, Urban planning. 1 INTRODUCTION Climate change has been a subject of concern for the last two decades and the risks associated with it continue to increase. One of the most endangering aspects of climate change is the flood events happening due to the rise in sea level and heavy rainfall events (IPCC 2013). According to the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) (2020), the global temperature as of 2020 is 1.2 ± 0.1 °C warmer than the pre-industrial (1850-1900) baseline, the sea level has been rising on an average of 3.29 (+/- 0.3) mm per year, and no. of extreme events such as fires, floods, droughts, heat waves, cold waves and severe cyclone storms have also increased across the globe. 1.1 United Nation’s Sustainability Development Goals The United Nations has developed several Sustainable Development Goals (United Nations Sustainable Development 2015) targeting the environmental, social and economic factors on a global scale that are set to be achieved by its 2030 agenda. One of the goals in the SDGs targets climate change and emphasizes on taking urgent action to combat climate change. Following up with the development of the SDGs, the Paris agreement, which is a legal binding international treaty on climate change, was also adopted by 196 parties at COP 21 in Paris in 2015 (UNFCCC 2015). The United Arab Emirates (UAE) is one of the contributing countries in the UN SDGs. The UAE
Gribniak, V., Rimkus, A., Holschemacher, K., Quapp, U., Singh, A., and Yazdani, S. (eds.) RAD-04-2 © 2024 ISEC Press has set a National Climate Change Adaptation Program NCCAP 2017-2050 developed by UAE Ministry of Climate Change and Environment (MOCCAE 2020) to make it stand out as one of the climate-resilient countries worldwide. The program focuses on assessing the impacts of climate change on key sectors such as health, infrastructure, environment and energy, and to identify the associated risks in order to build resilience, take urgent actions and develop well-established adaptation measures towards them (MOCCAE 2020). 1.2 Flash Floods in The United Arab Emirates In the recent years, UAE has experienced several flash floods as well as cyclonic events from neighboring countries that resulted in flooding the coastline areas and causing extensive damage (Davies 2017). In April 2024, the gulf region was hit by a massive storm with a record 254 millimeters of rainfall in Al Ain, a city in the UAE. It was the largest ever in a 24-hour period since records started in 1949 (Cornwell 2024). In 2020, the UAEs National Center of Meteorology NCM reported the highest rainfall record since 1996 in UAE with 190.4 mm of rainfall. Several government initiatives (Celestial 2020, WAM 2020) have been taken to mitigate the issue; however, a long-term plan is needed to tackle the climate change, or more specifically, the flooding issue. Therefore, it was deemed necessary to conduct an in-depth study on the risks associated with heavy rainfalls events in the United Arab Emirates and suggest possible solutions. The research was conducted in collaboration with the Ministry of Energy and Infrastructure UAE (formerly known as Ministry of Infrastructure and Development) on a selected case study area, for which geographical and hydrological details were provided by the ministry. The research aims to offer a reliable methodology that can be applied in designing and executing dam or drainage system projects throughout the United Arab Emirates. 2 THE RAS AL-KHAIMAH CASE STUDY 2.1 Background This research is focused on analyzing the floods occurring in Shamal area located in Ras-Al- Khaimah. The study area has a hot desert climate with high temperatures and infrequent irregular low rainfall. The minimum temperatures never go below 0 degree in water, but the maximum temperature rises to more than 45 degrees in summer. The mean annual rainfall is around 119 mm; however, this level varies greatly from year to year, ranging from 282 mm to 24 mm and almost 90% of these rainfalls occur during winter, with a mean annual evaporation of 3322mm. This area is characterized by a rugged mountain terrain, bare and rocky with little or no vegetation, with elevations of around 600 m that transition down to 100 m, making the wadi area and its surroundings be the lowest point, thus, it is where all the water accumulates. The soil types of the study area were subdivided into five series on a basis of texture and carbonate content: wadi gravel soils, sierozems, non-saline alkali soils, saline non-alkali soils, and saline alkali soils. It is also observed that this area is affected by the flash floods coming from wadi Haqeel which has a catchment area of 24.7 km2 according to the data provided by MOEI. The residential areas are being constructed in the direction of the wadi flow pattern, which automatically obstructs the natural flow of water, thus, resulting in endangering the livelihood of the citizens. In addition to that, there is lack of protection channels embedded in the area, which again increases the risks of flood occurrence.
Proceedings of International Structural Engineering and Construction, 11(2), 2024 Developing Materials and Structures for Sustainable Engineering RAD-04-3 © 2024 ISEC Press 2.2 The Hydrological Modeling Process After defining the characteristics of the study area, a Hydrological Modeling System, HEC-HMS (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers 2020a) was used to develop the hydrologic model. The simulations are based on an event or continuous model, where a single storm event can range from few hours to days and a continuous model for longer periods, predicting watershed response both during and between precipitation events (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers 2000). The single event model was run for a period of 24 hours. In addition, for hydraulic modelling and simulations, a hypothetical (virtual) day of storm is required as an input which was also provided. For modelling the runoff volume, the model parameters are combined from each of the runoff-volume models, direct run- off models and base flow models along with routing choice models. The process is described briefly below. 2.2.1 Defining the physical characteristics of watershed and calculation of runoff volumes A basin model is used to define the physical characteristics of watershed. Interconnected hydrologic elements are created to simulate runoff processes and subsequently, the infiltration losses. For computing the runoff volumes, the watershed is considered as a pervious surface and cumulative volume losses for the study area are computed using the Initial and Constant-Rate loss model and the Soil Conservation Service (SCS) curve number loss models, details of which can be found in HEC-HMS User’s Manual (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers 2020b). 2.2.2 The kinematic wave modelling technique In order to select the drainage system required, kinematic wave modelling technique is used to showcase the watershed responses. The model usu