Title: The Global Water Risk Snapshot - Roland Berger
URL: https://www.rolandberger.com/publications/publication_pdf/Roland_Berger_Global_Water_Stress_Snapshot-June-2024.pdf
Source Type: pdf
Domain: rolandberger.com
Content Type: application/pdf
Search Query: UAE flood damage statistics 2020-2024

Cover piyaset/iStock June 2024 Global Water Risk Snapshot Produced by the Roland Berger Water Management Team
2 The Earth's water cycle is a delicate balance that ensures water is distributed across various ecosystems. But overconsumption, pollution, and climate change are disrupting that balance - increasing water-related risks around the world. Water risk typically occurs when the demand for water exceeds supply, when poor water quality restricts its use, or during extreme weather events. It can take many forms but typically manifests as the depletion of water sources, flooding damage, or the degradation of water resources or aquatic environments. Water risk can have a direct impact on communities, such as when cities face 'Day Zero' scenarios in which water supplies come close to depletion. But water is also a strategic business risk. Water is essential across many industries, from agriculture to data centers, serving as a direct and indirect input that ensures business productivity. Shortages or declines in water quality have significant economic consequences, while floods destroy billions worth of assets each year. Companies operating in water-scarce regions face rising costs and decreased competitiveness. A global issue felt at a local level Water risk is a global issue, but it manifests in hyper-localized ways. Understanding specific risks requires deep analysis – down to the water basin level. The Global Water Risk Snapshot is designed to call broader attention to the increasing threat of water- related risks around the world. It provides a high-level indication of how water risks impact different parts of the world today – and where they could intensify in the future. There are many factors to consider when assessing water risk, from physical risks, such as water scarcity, risks that are impacted by regulatory initiatives and reputational risks influenced by public awareness and conflict. The Global Water Risk Snapshot focuses primarily on physical risks in 10 different countries, providing additional context around local regulatory or reputational factors, as relevant. Addressing water-related risk requires sustainable management practices, technological innovations, and collaborative efforts to ensure the equitable and efficient use of the planet's most vital resource. Roland Berger is working closely with businesses, utilities, and government organizations to develop comprehensive water strategies to increase water resilience and help make a meaningful contribution to global water security. Management Summary Global Water Risk Snapshot
3 Source: WWF Water Risk Filter, World Resources Institute Aqueduct Floods ·  Flood risk category considers: ‑ Historical flood patterns since 1985 ‑ Future trends, assessed using projections from global climate and hydrological models ·  Occurs due to heavy rainfall, rapid snowmelt, dams/levees break, or storm surge ·  Water scarcity risks integrates four global datasets: ‑ Water Depletion ‑ Baseline Water Stress ‑ Blue Water Scarcity ‑ Available Water Remaining (AWARE) ·  Compares water use or demand to available water in each area Physical risks include the threat of water scarcity, flooding and reduced water quality Understood as the most tangible form of water risk, physical water risk factors primarily include water scarcity, increased flooding, and/or reduced water quality. For the purposes of this overview, our team utilized publicly available data from multiple sources including the WWF Water Risk Filter, World Resources Institute Aqueduct Floods, and local assessments. To assess water scarcity, the WWF Water Risk Filter compares water demand against water availability and considers how human activity could worsen the impact of natural factors, such as aridity and drought. Aqueduct's flooding data considers historical flooding patterns tracked since 1985, with projections from global climate and hydrological models. The WWF's water quality assessments concentrate on parameters that directly and indirectly impact water security and freshwater biodiversity, aligning with the UN Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 6.3.2, including biological oxygen demand (BOD), electrical conductivity (salinity and pH), and nutrient loading (nitrogen, phosphorus). While in-depth analysis is required to develop a full picture of physical water risks, this data can help illustrate regions in which more drastic action may be required to improve water resilience. Understanding key water risk factors Physical water risks assess natural & human-induced conditions in river basins, the status of water ecosystems, and suitability for specific uses Global Water Risk Snapshot Water scarcity Flooding ·  Key indicators of water quality include: ‑ Biological oxygen demand (BOD) ‑ Electrical conductivity (salinity and pH) ‑ Nutrient loading (nitrogen, phosphorus) ·  Considers direct and indirect impacts on water security and freshwater biodiversity, aligning with the Sustainable Development Goal 6.3.2. Water quality Physical water risk
4 Source: WWF Water Risk Filter, Leaflet | Powered by Esri | HERE, Garmin, FAO, NOAA, EPA, AAFC, NRCan, Greve et al (2018) Kummu et al (2017) Looking specifically at water scarcity risks from a global perspective, the regions most impacted include the Middle East, North Africa, Sub-Saharan Africa, Central Asia, and parts of South Asia. However, high-risk levels are experienced in every major region of the world. The Middle East and North Africa region faces severe water scarcity due to its arid climate, limited freshwater resources, and high population growth. Countries such as Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates and Egypt rely heavily on desalination plants and underground water sources to meet their water demands. Central Asia, including countries such as Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan, and Kazakhstan, faces water scarcity due to the arid climate, overuse of water resources for agriculture, and inefficient irrigation practices. A notable consequence of scarcity is the shrinking of the Aral Sea. In South Asia, countries such as India and Pakistan also face water scarcity. due to a combination of factors, including population growth, inadequate infrastructure, and inefficient water management. The Indus River, a vital water source for both countries, is under stress due to overuse and climate change. Addressing water scarcity in these regions and on a global scale requires sustainable water management practices, investment in infrastructure, and international cooperation. Snapshot of global water risk Water scarcity impacts every continent but is most directly felt in regions with arid climates Figure 1: Global water scarcity risk - 2020 Figure 2: Global water scarcity risk – 2050 Global Water Risk Snapshot Physical risks: A global look at water scarcity risks
5 Source: WWF Water Risk Filter, Leaflet | Powered by Esri | RJGC, Esri, HERE, Garmin, FAO, NOAA, AAFC, NRCan, Hirabayashi et al. (2013) Riverine and coastal flooding and flash floods pose threats to both urban and rural areas around the world. However, some of the regions most impacted by flood risks include Southeast Asia, South Asia, Central America, parts of Africa. Southeast Asia, particularly countries such as Indonesia, Vietnam, and Thailand, faces high vulnerability to flooding due to factors such as monsoon rains, low-lying topography, and densely populated river deltas. In South Asia, countries such as India, Nepal, Bangladesh and Pakistan also experience frequent flooding due to heavy monsoon rains, as well as inadequate drainage systems, and deforestation. Overflows of major rivers such as the Ganges and Brahmaputra can result in devastating floods, affecting millions of people and causing significant damage to infrastructure and agriculture. Central America is prone to flood risks due to its geographical location and exposure to tropical storms and hurricanes. Countries such as Honduras, Nicaragua, and Guatemala face the dual threat of heavy rainfall and storm surges, leading to flash floods and mudslides that can cause extensive damage to communities and infrastructure. Parts of Africa, including countries such as Nigeria, Sudan, and Mozambique, are also impacted by flooding risks. Factors such as irregular rainfall patterns, poor infrastructure, and inadequate urban planning contribute to the vulnerability of these regions. Snapshot of global water risk Heavy rainfall, geographical features, inadequate infrastructure, and population density can intensify flooding impacts Figure 1: Global flood risk - 2020 Figure 2: Global flood risk – 2050 Global Water Risk Snapshot Physical risks: A global look at flood risks
6 Source: WWF Water Risk Filter, Leaflet | Powered by Esri | RJGC, Esri, HERE, Garmin, FAO, NOAA, EPA, AAFC, NRCan, Xie & Ringler (2017) Snapshot of global water risk Several factors are contributing to the degradation in the quality of freshwater resources around the world Figure 1: Global water 