Title: 2026 Climate and Catastrophe Insight - Aon
URL: https://www.aon.com/en/insights/reports/climate-and-catastrophe-report
Source Type: html
Domain: aon.com
Content Type: text/html
Search Query: UAE flood damage cost 2015 2024 annual

2026 Climate and Catastrophe Insight

Environmental, Social and Governance Insights
Q4 2023 Global Insurance Market Insights
Transaction Solutions Global Claims Study
Through our global expertise across two key areas of need ― Risk Capital and Human Capital ― our clients are better advised within, and across, their risk and people strategies.
While we all face many of the same challenges and opportunities, every industry is different and requires dedicated expertise.
From navigating climate change to workforce resilience, today’s leaders need access to powerful insights to make better decisions.
We exist to shape decisions for the better — to protect and enrich the lives of people around the world
Organizing Around Today's Biggest Client Needs
This insight is part 04 of 11 in this Collection.
As climate change intensifies natural disasters, how can organizations build resilience & identify trends to stay relevant while protecting people and property?
These catastrophes are a reminder that communities, businesses and governments all have a role to play in building resilience — from strengthening buildings and infrastructure to improving financial protection. The more we invest in preparedness , adaptation and risk management , the better positioned we are to reduce long-term impacts and protect people and property when the next disaster strikes.
The protection gap fell to a record low of 51%, due to the large concentration of losses in the U.S. which has higher insurance coverage. However, half of global economic losses remained uninsured, highlighting the ongoing protection gap in emerging markets and the opportunity for insurers and financial institutions to expand coverage and develop innovative risk‑transfer solutions.
Our Better Being podcast series, hosted by Aon Chief Wellbeing Officer Rachel Fellowes, explores wellbeing strategies and resilience. This season we cover human sustainability, kindness in the workplace, how to measure wellbeing, managing grief and more.
Expert Views on Today's Risk Capital and Human Capital Issues
Expert Views on Today's Risk Capital and Human Capital Issues
Expert Views on Today's Risk Capital and Human Capital Issues
Better Decisions Across Interconnected Risk and People Issues.
The construction industry is under pressure from interconnected risks and notable macroeconomic developments. Learn how your organization can benefit from construction insurance and risk management.
Our Cyber Resilience collection gives you access to Aon’s latest insights on the evolving landscape of cyber threats and risk mitigation measures. Reach out to our experts to discuss how to make the right decisions to strengthen your organization’s cyber resilience.
Our Employee Wellbeing collection gives you access to the latest insights from Aon's human capital team. You can also reach out to the team at any time for assistance with your employee wellbeing needs.
Explore Aon's latest environmental social and governance (ESG) insights.
Our Global Insurance Market Insights highlight insurance market trends across pricing, capacity, underwriting, limits, deductibles and coverages.
Better Decisions Across Interconnected Risk and People Issues.
How do the top risks on business leaders’ minds differ by region and how can these risks be mitigated? Explore the regional results to learn more.
Explore Aon's corporate sustainability impact and strategy.
Trade, technology, weather and workforce stability are the central forces in today’s risk landscape.
These industry-specific articles explore the top risks, their underlying drivers and the actions leaders are taking to build resilience.
Our Human Capital Analytics collection gives you access to the latest insights from Aon's human capital team. Contact us to learn how Aon’s analytics capabilities helps organizations make better workforce decisions.
Read our collection of human capital articles that explore in depth hot topics for HR and risk professionals, including using data and analytics to measure total rewards programs, how HR and finance can better partner and the impact AI will have on the workforce.
Explore our hand-picked insights for human resources professionals.
Our Workforce Collection provides access to the latest insights from Aon’s Human Capital team on topics ranging from health and benefits, retirement and talent practices. You can reach out to our team at any time to learn how we can help address emerging workforce challenges.
Our Mergers and Acquisitions (M&A) collection gives you access to the latest insights from Aon's thought leaders to help dealmakers make better decisions. Explore our latest insights and reach out to the team at any time for assistance with transaction challenges and opportunities.
The challenges in adopting renewable energy are changing with technological advancements, increasing market competition and numerous financial support mechanisms. Learn how your organization can benefit from our renewables solutions.
How do businesses navigate their way through new forms of volatility and make decisions that protect and grow their organizations?
Our Parametric Insurance Collection provides ways your organization can benefit from this simple, straightforward and fast-paying risk transfer solution. Reach out to learn how we can help you make better decisions to manage your catastrophe exposures and near-term volatility.
Our Pay Transparency and Equity collection gives you access to the latest insights from Aon's human capital team on topics ranging from pay equity to diversity, equity and inclusion. Contact us to learn how we can help your organization address these issues.
Forecasters are predicting an extremely active 2024 Atlantic hurricane season. Take measures to build resilience to mitigate risk for hurricane-prone properties.
Our Technology Collection provides access to the latest insights from Aon's thought leaders on navigating the evolving risks and opportunities of technology. Reach out to the team to learn how we can help you use technology to make better decisions for the future.
Our Trade Collection gives you access to the latest insights from Aon's thought leaders on navigating the evolving risks and opportunities for international business. Reach out to our team to understand how to make better decisions around macro trends and why they matter to businesses.
Better Decisions Across Interconnected Risk and People Issues.
With a changing climate, organizations in all sectors will need to protect their people and physical assets, reduce their carbon footprint, and invest in new solutions to thrive. Our Weather Collection provides you with critical insights to be prepared.
Our Workforce Resilience collection gives you access to the latest insights from Aon's Human Capital team. You can reach out to the team at any time for questions about how we can assess gaps and help build a more resilience workforce.
Risk is evolving - and so are the strategies to manage it. Aon’s survey reveals how nearly 3,000 leaders in 60+ countries are tackling today’s top risks.
Climate change is brewing trouble for coffee. Droughts threaten supply, but smart climate analytics and built-in insurance are helping food companies safeguard beans and cut financial risk.
As climate volatility escalates, insurers face a critical inflection point. Traditional responses like hiking premiums and cutting coverage are no longer enough. A new resilience strategy is emerging to drive growth, restore trust and strengthen client partnerships.
Artificial intelligence is driving unprecedented demand for data center power, straining global grid capacity and reshaping energy strategies. Developers are racing to secure reliable energy but face complex risks and challenges.
How can we help your organization navigate the impact of climate change and seize opportunities?
Sign up to receive updates on the latest events, insights, news and more from our team.
Information on the latest events, insights, news and more from our team is heading your way soon.
You will soon receive an email to verify your email address. Please click on the link included in this note to complete the subscription process, which also includes providing consent in applicable locations and an opportunity to manage your email preferences.
Tell us more about you and how we can help your business make better decisions.
Your request was submitted successfully and is on its way to our team.
Your request is being reviewed so we can align you to the best resources on our team. In the meantime, we invite you to explore some of our latest insights below.
Complete the form to unlock your content. Whether it’s a downloadable resource or a webinar, you’ll get instant access after submission. Start exploring now!
Your content will automatically download and display shortly. If it doesn’t appear, click the button below to view it manually. Enjoy exploring!
If you encounter an issue, use the link below to start a new download.
Capabilities Capabilities What we do