Title: scientific report Dubai floods
URL: https://ca1-clm.edcdn.com/publications/DubaiFloodsReport.pdf?v=1714385983
Source Type: pdf
Domain: ca1-clm.edcdn.com
Content Type: application/pdf
Search Query: UAE flood events frequency 2015 2024

Heavy precipitation hitting vulnerable communities in the UAE and Oman becoming an increasing threat as the climate warms Authors Mariam Zachariah, Grantham Institute - Climate Change and the Environment, Imperial College London, UK Joyce Kimutai, Grantham Institute - Climate Change and the Environment, Imperial College London, UK Clair Barnes, Grantham Institute - Climate Change and the Environment, Imperial College London, UK Edward Gryspeerdt, Grantham Institute - Climate Change and the Environment, Imperial College London, UK Sonia I. Seneviratne Institute for Atmospheric and Climate Science, ETH Zurich, Switzerland Mansour Almazroui, Center of Excellence for Climate Change Research (CECCR), King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia Robert Vautard, Institut Pierre-Simon Laplace, CNRS, Sorbonne Université, Paris, France Xuebin Zhang, Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium, University of Victoria, Canada Izidine Pinto, Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute (KNMI), De Bilt, The Netherlands Maja Vahlberg, Red Cross Red Crescent Climate Centre, the Hague, Netherlands (based in Ubmeje/Umeå, Sweden) Sayanti Sengupta, Red Cross Red Crescent Climate Centre, the Hague, Netherlands (based in Berlin, Germany) Fahad Saeed, Climate Analytics, Berlin, Germany; Weather and Climate Services, Islamabad, Pakistan Friederike E. L Otto, Grantham Institute - Climate Change and the Environment, Imperial College London, UK Review authors Ben Clarke, Grantham Institute - Climate Change and the Environment, Imperial College London, UK Sjoukje Philip, Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute (KNMI), De Bilt, The Netherlands Ulrike Lohmann, Institute for Atmospheric and Climate Science, ETH Zurich, Switzerland Heini Wernli, Institute for Atmospheric and Climate Science, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
Malcolm Mistry, Red Cross Red Crescent Climate Centre, the Hague, Netherlands; Environment & Health Modelling (EHM) Lab, Department of Public Health, Environments and Society, The London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine (LSHTM), London, UK Rana El Hajj, Red Cross Red Crescent Climate Centre, the Hague, Netherlands (based in Beirut, Lebanon) Roop Singh, Red Cross Red Crescent Climate Centre, the Hague, Netherlands (based in New Jersey, USA) Julie Arrighi, Red Cross Red Crescent Climate Centre, the Hague, Netherlands (based in New York, USA) Main Findings ● The UAE, Oman and the wider analysed region are located in a so-called hyper-arid region, with on average very little rainfall but with very high variability from year to year. Thus heavy rainfall events such as the one analysed here occur very rarely, leading to short records of similar events which results in high uncertainty in the assessment.. ● The El Niño Southern Oscillation, a naturally occurring climate phenomenon, was found to be important to explain the variability in the observed rainfall. Most previous heavy rainfall events in the area occurred during El Niño years. ● To assess the role of human-induced climate change we first estimate if there is a trend in the observations associated with the warming up until today of 1.2°C and find that there is a trend, making heavy rainfall such as observed more likely. Based on the observations, the event was 10-40% more intense than it would have been had it occurred in an El Nino year in a 1.2°C cooler climate. ● To further characterise and quantify the role of human-induced climate change we then also look at climate models with high enough resolution to capture precipitation over the comparably small study region. The available climate models do not consistently exhibit a trend even for the models that were evaluated to simulate rainfall in the region reasonably well. However there is high uncertainty in this finding, again, due to high year to year rainfall variability. ● Based on the IPCC AR6 assessment, which includes scientific literature available up to January 2021, there is “medium confidence” that heavy precipitation would be detectably larger in the Arabian Peninsula at about 1.5°C of global warming compared to pre-industrial climate conditions, which is close to the current level of global warming. ● The disagreement between model results and observations prevents us from concluding with certainty that human-induced climate change is the main driver making this event more likely. However, while multiple reasons could explain the absence of a trend in our model results, we have no alternative explanation for a trend
in observations other than the expectation of heavy rainfall increasing in a warmer climate. ● While the heavy rainfall was well forecasted by national meteorological agencies, floodwaters led to a high number of deaths and extensive damages to homes, shops, offices and cars in the UAE and Oman. The majority of flood related deaths occurred when people were travelling, and many people in Dubai were forced to abandon their cars in floodwaters. The researchers say this suggests warnings may not have reached some people or were not specific enough to the impacts expected in particular regions. ● The high flood risk varies across demographics. In Oman and the UAE, 80 and 85% of the total populations, respectively, live in flood-prone and low-lying areas that are highly exposed. Because of various challenges to their abilities to respond to flood risk, particularly vulnerable groups tend to include older adults, individuals with disabilities, women with caregiving responsibilities, racial/ethnic minorities, migrant workers, and lower-income groups. ● Across both countries, a high degree of surfaces with limited permeability and absorptive capacity from urban developments, inadequate drainage and the hyper-arid soils exacerbate the risk and severity of flash floods. ● UAE and Oman adopt proactive disaster risk management strategies, with functional systems for early warning, early action, and emergency response to floods, along with long-term adaptation planning. However, reducing the high exposure to flood risk, more proactive urban planning and integration of impact-based forecasting in EWS are necessary to reduce impacts associated with similar events in the future. ● Finally, cloud seeding was reported to not have been implemented in the context of this event, and additionally even in case of implementation has no influence on the amount of atmospheric moisture available, which was the main anomalous variable preceding the precipitation event. Hence, we can conclude that cloud seeding had no significant influence in the event 1 Introduction Beginning on Sunday the 14th of April 2024, the United Arab Emirates (UAE) and the northern parts of Oman were hit by exceptionally heavy rainfall that led to at least 20 fatalities in Oman (NYT, 2024) and four in the UAE and caused massive disruption in infrastructure and public life in the area. In Dubai, most of the rain fell on Monday the 15th of April 2024 and exceeded all previous records of daily rainfall in the last 75 years when records began, with some areas recording more than 250 mm in less than 24h (UAE government, 2024). There are reports of outbreak of water-borne disease in the aftermath of floods already in some parts of the UAE (Farooqui, 2024) The heavy rain was associated with a low-pressure system that developed from an initial mid-latitude disturbance at 500 hPa, located over Turkey on 13-14/04 (Figure 1). It deepened toward the Persian Gulf and moved slowly to the east, combining with heat over Saudi Arabia. This particular weather
condition, as shown on Figure 1, enhanced vertical motion leading to the formation of mesoscale convective systems (MCS) in the region. MCS are the typical atmospheric systems causing heavy rainfall in the southern Arabian peninsula as well as other arid regions. These systems are generally triggered by moisture advection over the Arabian sea, Gulf of Arabia or Red Sea in combination with cold air aloft and occur predominantly in March and April (Nelli et al., 2021). In this particular case the MCS system developed under a large-scale wavy structure with high pressure and anomalous temperatures in Western Europe and its low-pressure counterpart in the Middle-East. At 500 hPa, a cut-off low from the wavy storm track detached and made a deep excursion into Saudi Arabia and the Persian Gulf (figure 1). The same system also led to low-pressure systems over other parts of Asia, causing for example extremely heavy precipitation over northern Pakistan and adjoining areas of Afghanistan. Authorities in both Afghanistan and Pakistan have reported a death toll of 50 individuals each in just one day (Aljazeera, 2024). Figure 1. Absolute values of geopotential height at 500hPa (top) and anomalies relative to March-May 1991-2020 (bottom). Data source ERA5 The southern Arabian peninsula has a very arid climate with limited and irregular precipitation. In the inland desert areas, annual precipitation typically ranges from 40 to 80 mm, while mountainou