Title: Strengthening Resilience to Climate Change - IIASA PURE
URL: https://pure.iiasa.ac.at/id/eprint/21329/1/20260217_Adaptation%20report.pdf
Source Type: pdf
Domain: pure.iiasa.ac.at
Content Type: application/pdf
Search Query: UAE flood damage statistics 2020-2024

1 Strengthening Resilience to Climate Change Recommendations for an effective EU adaptation policy framework
2 European Scientific Advisory Board on Climate Change Kongens Nytorv 6 1050 Copenhagen K Denmark Tel. +45 33367100 Website: https://climate-advisory-board.europa.eu Enquiries: https://climate-advisory-board.europa.eu/contact Manuscript completed in February 2026 First edition Neither the European Scientific Advisory Board on Climate Change nor any person acting on behalf of the Advisory Board is responsible for the use that might be made of the following information. Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union, 2026 © European Scientific Advisory Board on Climate Change, 2026 Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged. For any use or reproduction of elements that are not owned by the European Scientific Advisory Board on Climate Change, permission may need to be sought directly from the respective rightsholders. Print ISBN 978-92-9480-744-1 doi:10.2800/7840611 TH-01-25-036-EN-C PDF ISBN 978-92-9480-743-4 doi:10.2800/6761189 TH-01-25-036-EN-N
3 About the European Scientific Advisory Board on Climate Change The European Scientific Advisory Board on Climate Change (hereafter ‘the Advisory Board’) is an independent scientific advisory body that provides the EU with scientific knowledge, expertise and advice relating to climate change. The Advisory Board identifies actions and opportunities to achieve the EU’s climate neutrality target by 2050. The Advisory Board was established by the European Climate Law of 2021, with a mandate to serve as a point of reference for the EU on scientific knowledge relating to climate change by virtue of its independence and scientific and technical expertise. The members of the Advisory Board are: • Ottmar Edenhofer (Chair) • Jette Bredahl Jacobsen (Vice Chair) • Laura Díaz Anadón (Vice Chair) • Maarten van Aalst • Constantinos Cartalis • Suraje Dessai • Vera Eory • Edgar Hertwich • Lena Kitzing • Elena López-Gunn • Lars J. Nilsson • Keywan Riahi • Joeri Rogelj • Nicolaas Schrijver • Jean-Francois Soussana The Advisory Board is supported in the execution of its tasks by a secretariat, hosted by the European Environment Agency. Acknowledgements The Advisory Board would like to acknowledge the contribution of Mathilde de Goër de Herve (Ramboll) to the preparation of this report.
4 Recommendations Europe faces increasingly severe climate impacts, including rising loss of life, economic damages and ecosystem harm. While deep and sustained emission reductions – alongside the scaling-up of carbon removals – remain indispensable to limit future warming, adaptation must now be strengthened to prepare for unavoidable temperature increases and safeguard Europe’s strategic priorities. The European Scientific Advisory Board on Climate Change sets out five recommendations to move from fragmented and largely reactive adaptation efforts towards an effective, fair and transformational adaptation policy framework. These recommendations aim to inform the forthcoming European integrated framework for climate resilience and other ongoing EU initiatives. Recommendation 1. Mandate and harmonise climate risk assessments The EU should require climate risk assessments across relevant EU policies and decision-making. To support a more harmonised approach and strengthen adaptation planning across the EU, it should establish common climate scenarios – including a common reference – and methodological standards. Efforts to fully integrate climate risk assessment into corporate reporting, disclosure and financial supervision should be reinforced. Recommendation 2. Adopt a common reference for adaptation planning The EU should adopt a common reference for adaptation planning based on SSP2-4.5 to prepare for evolving physical climate risks arising from an emissions pathway to 2.8-3.3 °C of global warming by 2100 compared to the pre-industrial period. This would translate to higher levels of warming in Europe, which has historically warmed roughly twice as fast as the global average, and is currently experiencing about 1°C more warming regionally than the global average. More adverse pathways (e.g. SSP3-7.0) should be used for stress-testing to assess the robustness of policies, investments and adaptation options under higher-risk futures. Recommendation 3. Set the vision for a climate resilient EU The EU should set out a clear vision for a climate-resilient EU by 2050 and the longer-term, supported by sectoral strategies and cross-cutting adaptation targets. This vision should be grounded in science, EU commitments, and participation. Recommendation 4. Embed fair and just climate resilience in all EU policies and measures The EU should apply the climate-resilience-by-design principle across all its policies, programmes and investment decisions. It should develop and continuously update a monitoring, evaluation and learning system for adaptation. It should also establish a framework for fairness assessments to be applied to relevant EU policies and measures. Recommendation 5. Mobilise public and private adaptation investment and establish a coherent approach to managing the costs of climate impacts The EU should embed climate risk management into national economic governance and fiscal planning through its economic governance framework, and strengthen the contribution of the next EU multiannual financial framework to climate resilience. It should also strengthen efforts to mobilise and align private finance with climate resilience objectives. In addition, the EU should support efforts to address the growing climate insurance protection gap and strengthen the resilience of insurance systems to rising climate impacts and risks. Crisis response and recovery instruments should be strengthened to reflect more frequent and severe climate-related disasters.
5 Summary Europe’s escalating climate risks call for a stronger, more proactive and coherent approach to adaptation Global temperatures are rising, with Europe experiencing significant and escalating costs from climate change impacts Climate change is not a distant or abstract risk for Europe; it is imposing substantial human, economic and environmental costs that are rising rapidly. Global average temperatures have risen to around 1.4 °C above pre-industrial levels, and insufficient global progress on mitigation makes it increasingly likely that global warming will exceed the Paris Agreement’s 1.5 °C temperature goal. Europe is warming faster than the global average, and the continent has experienced average annual temperatures over the past five years of around 2.4 °C above pre-industrial levels. Rising global temperatures have brought more frequent and severe climate hazards - such as heatwaves, droughts, wildfires, flooding, sea level rise and coastal erosion - and compounding impacts that are being felt across Europe. Weather and climate-related extreme events have caused significant loss of life, serious harm to people’s health, and impacts to ecosystems and economies. For instance, extreme heat has already caused tens of thousands of premature deaths across Europe, including an estimated 24,000 in the summer of 2025 alone, of which over two-thirds have been attributed to climate change. Heavy rainfall and flood events have killed hundreds, displaced communities, and caused severe damages to towns and infrastructure. These events are causing substantial economic damages and disruption. Estimated damages to infrastructure and physical assets reached an average of around EUR 45 billion per year over the 2020-2024 period, a five-fold increase compared to the 1980-1989 period. Adaptation is necessary to protect the EU from rising climate risks and safeguard its ability to deliver on strategic priorities Even under optimistic global mitigation pathways, scientific projections show that climate hazards will intensify over the decades to come. Without adequate adaptation, most climate risks in the EU are projected to reach critical levels by mid-century, bringing frequent, severe, persistent and far-reaching impacts. These will harm people’s health and wellbeing, disrupt critical infrastructure and systems, weaken economic productivity and fiscal sustainability, and accelerate the loss of ecosystems and biodiversity. Taken together, with frequent and systemic impacts compounding one another, these risk eroding and destabilising the EU’s economic and social foundations, compromising its ability to deliver on strategic priorities such as security, energy autonomy, economic competitiveness, social cohesion and democratic stability. Societies must prepare for the impacts already being felt today, as well as those associated with future levels of warming. Adaptation plays an essential role in reducing the harm that climate hazards pose to people, places and systems. It has been shown to effectively reduce mortality during heatwaves, limit damages from floo