Title: Adaptation of the UAE's Environment to Climate Change 2019
URL: https://data.emiratesnaturewwf.ae/media/files/2025-06/05-NCCAP_Environment_DRAFT3.pdf
Source Type: pdf
Domain: data.emiratesnaturewwf.ae
Content Type: application/pdf
Search Query: UAE national climate adaptation plan flood

National Climate Change Adaptation Program Adaptation of the UAE’s Environment to Climate Change Risk Assessment & Options for Action 2019 www.moccae.gov.ae
National Climate Change Adaptation Program Adaptation of the UAE’s Environment to Climate Change Risk Assessment & Options for Action 2019
Adaptation of the UAE’s Environment to Climate Change Table of Contents Executive Summary Introduction 1. Climate Change and the Environment 1.1. Climate change in the UAE 1.2. Linkages between climate and the environment 1.3. Global practices on climate adaptation in the environment sector 2. Assessing Climate Risks to the Environment 2.1. Sectoral risk assessment framework 2.2. UAE’s natural environment 2.3. Evaluation and prioritization of climate risks 3. Options for Action 3.1. Initiatives on climate adaptation in the environment sector 3.2. Opportunities and way forward References Annex: Summary of Climate Change Projections 05 06 07 09 13 20 04 08 12 15 17 18 22 23 01 03 03 05 07 09 09 09 15 21 21 25 27 29 Figures & Tables Figure 1. Ecosystem services and their roles Figure 2. Examples of climate change impacts on the marine environment Figure 3. Examples of projected regional impacts of climate change Figure 4. UAE sectoral climate risk assessment framework Figure 5. Critical and sensitive habitats in Abu Dhabi Figure 6. Risk matrix for the environment Table 1. Current trends and future projections of the UAE climate Table 2. Examples of climate adaptation strategies in selected countries Table 3. State of Abu Dhabi’s environment Table 4. Impacts of climate change on the environment Table 5. Final list of impacts for risk assessment Table 6. Evaluation of impacts Table 7. Potential adaptation measures for addressing the “very high” risk of coral bleaching Table 8. Potential adaptation measures for addressing the “high” risk of loss of wetlands
National Climate Change Adaptation Program Adaptation of the UAE’s Environment to Climate Change Executive Summary As part of the National Climate Change Adaptation Program, this report presents the findings of the climate change risk assessment of the UAE’s natural environment. The assessment was conducted by the Ministry of Climate Change and Environment (MOCCAE) according to a framework developed from global best practices. The UAE Sectoral Climate Risk Assessment Framework consists of five steps: 1) take stock of climate trends and relevant sectoral issues; 2) identify potential impacts of climate change on the sector; 3) evaluate the magnitude and likelihood of impacts to understand the risks; 4) assess and prioritize the risks; and 5) identify potential adaptation actions. Climate change and the environment Climate change will result in higher temperatures across the UAE. Climate projections show a 2–3°C increase in average temperatures in the summer months of 2060–2079, although the changes may vary across the emirates. Humidity is expected to increase along the coast, while rainfall patterns are projected to change, with the Northern Emirates expected to have more intense rainfall episodes. Sea level rise is expected to increase the threats of inundation along the coastline. Furthermore, the probability of extreme weather events is projected to increase in both frequency and magnitude. The UAE has been adapting to hyperarid climate conditions since long before climate change has become a global concern. In the future, climatic change is expected to cause a greater impact on the environment. Human-induced pressures, such as land use changes and pollution, will further exacerbate the impacts of climate change on the natural environment. Assessing climate risks to the environment Based on an extensive review of scientific literature on the impacts of climate change on the environment, this report identifies the most relevant impacts, which are further assessed upon consideration of the local evidence to fit the UAE context. The impacts are translated into risks through the interaction of impacts and likelihood. In this context, risk is defined as the likelihood of impact occurrence. The shortlisted risks shown in the table below encompass the different components of the UAE’s natural environment, namely coastal, freshwater, ocean, and terrestrial ecosystems, and associated services. MOCCAE conducted an initial assessment of the shortlisted risks through a five-point scale (“very low,” “low,” “medium,” “high,” and “very high”). The preliminary results were then shared with stakeholders through interactive workshops, which involved representatives from the public, private, and civil society sectors, and were facilitated by subject matter experts. MOCCAE consolidated the stakeholder inputs and reflected their comments in the final assessment while further verifying the available evidence. As a result, the following two risks (“very high” and “high”) were identified as priority risks: • Increased frequency of coral bleaching; and • Loss of wetlands and associated ecosystem services. For the “medium” risks, although they are not as critical as the “very high” and “high” risks, a thorough investigation would be necessary to implement control measures to minimize the risks and prevent them from escalating into “high” risks. The “low” risks also require sporadic monitoring to determine changes in the situation that may affect the risk level.
National Climate Change Adaptation Program Adaptation of the UAE’s Environment to Climate Change Risk level Impact Very High Increased frequency of coral bleaching High Loss of wetlands and associated ecosystem services Medium Loss of marine life Reduced groundwater levels and recharge capacity Loss of inland habitats and resources due to high salinity induced by sea level rise Increased soil erosion and land degradation during extreme weather events Reduced local food production Increased cases of harmful algal blooms Habitat destruction and fragmentation due to increased flash flood events Low Change in spatial distribution and temporal appearance of disease-causing species Increased landward migration of sandy shoreline Options for action Considering the UAE’s current climate adaptation efforts, the below list of potential measures is proposed to address the two priority risks to the environment. To prioritize actions, current efforts may continue or expand, and new initiatives may be introduced. Some measures may require collaboration across authorities due to their inter-sectoral nature. Type of measures Coral bleaching Loss of wetlands Examples of potential adaptation measures Physical safeguards • Expand artificial reefs to compensate areas with high coral mortality. • Expand coral seeding initiatives. • Continue mangrove restorations and periodic water quality monitoring to maintain tidal flow and nutrient levels. Risk management • Increase marine protected areas and reinforce policies to help build ecosystem resilience. • Increase marine and coastal protected areas with mangrove ecosystems to help build resilience. Knowledge • Conduct comprehensive mapping and monitoring of coral reefs using advanced technologies. • Establish communities of practice to widen engagement on mangrove conservation. Enablers • Develop an integrated marine conservation and management framework. • Incorporate climate resilience in marine and coastal development planning. • Reinforce environmental impact assessments. • Develop a long-term strategy for wetland conservation, restoration, and management, as well as sustainable tourism. The risk assessment shows the vulnerability of the UAE’s ecosystems and associated services to the changing climate variables, which interact with a range of human-induced pressures, thereby further exacerbating the risks. The potential adaptation measures proposed in this assessment will be further analyzed and detailed to prioritize the most valuable actions and lay a roadmap for their implementation, including the nomination of lead and coordinating entities.
Adaptation of the UAE’s Environment to Climate Change 11 National Climate Change Adaptation Program
National Climate Change Adaptation Program Adaptation of the UAE’s Environment to Climate Change 02 01 Introduction As part of fulfilling its commitments under the Paris Agreement and in line with the UAE Vision 2021 and the UAE Green Agenda 2030, the UAE Government adopted the National Climate Change Plan 2050 (Climate Plan) in June 2017. The Plan aims to consolidate the country’s climate action under a single framework that specifies strategic priorities, covering both mitigation and adaptation. The Climate Plan structures action areas in three pillars: 1) greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions management; 2) climate change adaptation; and 3) private sector-driven innovative economic diversification. Under the adaptation pillar, the following outcomes are proposed: • By 2020: Climate change risk assessments are performed, and immediate measures are put in place. • By 2025: Adaptation planning i