Title: Dubai Announces Plans to Build $8B Stormwater Drainage Network
URL: https://www.enr.com/articles/58905-dubai-announces-plans-to-build-8b-stormwater-drainage-network
Source Type: html
Domain: enr.com
Content Type: text/html; charset=utf-8
Search Query: UAE drainage infrastructure condition report

Dubai Announces Plans to Build $8B Stormwater Drainage Network | Engineering News-Record

Dubai Announces Plans to Build $8B Stormwater Drainage Network
The Scalability Secret: Unlocking Business Continuity Through Tech Stacks
A Lasting Advantage: Future-Proofing General Contractors
Connected Construction: Transforming the Industry Through Integration
Arcadis CEO Terms WSP Global Takeover Proposals as ‘Opportunistic’ and ‘a Little Aggressive’
Washington Commanders Stadium Construction Team Announced
Skanska Appears to Save Millions in Pre-Trial Settlement of Project Head Injury
UPDATED: Senate Passes Stopgap Funding Bill With Split Over IIJA Transportation Programs
Hotel Construction Halted at $1.7B Bally's Chicago Casino Over Video Gaming Dispute
FPL Announces Plans to Install 30 Million Solar Panels in Florida
Firm Plans to Build New LNG Terminal at Port Fourchon, La.
Invenergy Plans to Build $220M Ohio Solar Panel Plant
ENR New York and New Jersey Infrastructure Forum
#1 Source for Construction News, Data, Rankings, Analysis, and Commentary
Record rainfall in April caused widespread flooding in Dubai and elsewhere in the United Arab Emirates. Anticipating more extreme weather in the future, Dubai plans a project that would increase its drainage capacity to 20 million cu m daily.
Photo Creative Commons CC0 1.0 Universal Public Domain Dedication
Dubai plans to spend the equivalent of $8.2 billion to build a stormwater drainage network, the emirate's ruler, Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum, announced June 24 . The work follows record damaging floods in April in the country and throughout the United Arab Emirates.
The infrastructure would increase Dubai’s rainwater drainage capacity by 700% to 20 million cu m daily, according to officials. Part of the project will involve boring tunnels with a flow capacity of 230 cu m per second. Dubai is set to begin the project immediately, with phased work completion by 2033.
The project will boost "readiness to face future climate-related challenges” for the next 100 years, he said in a statement.
The April 16 storms brought the largest volume of rain in the UAE since recordkeeping began in 1949. While most of the country averages between 5.5 in. and 7.9 in. of rain per year, the UAE National Centre of Meteorology reported some areas experienced more than 10 in. of rain. At least four people reportedly died, although the UAE government has not released official figures.
The UAE normally sees so little rain that its meteorology agency conducts cloud seeding to increase rainfall but did not perform any ahead of the April storms, it said. Cloud seeding involves adding certain types of particles to existing clouds to form ice crystals that will yield more precipitation.
Diana Francis, senior research scientist and head of the environmental and geophysical sciences lab at Khalifa University in Abu Dhabi, told the government-owned Emirates News Agency in April that the UAE will face more frequent and intense extreme weather events because of climate change.
“The amount of rain that fell on [April 16] is unprecedented and is equivalent to the amount of rain the UAE receives in two years,” she said.
Dubai officials said the stormwater project would address expected increased rainfall associated with climate change, and expand on work begun after flooding in 2019. Then, Dubai added drainage infrastructure in the Expo Dubai area, Jebel Ali and Al Maktoum International Airport City, where the country plans to build the world’s largest airport as part of a $35-billion project announced this year.
Looking for quick answers on construction and engineering topics? Try Ask ENR, our new smart AI search tool. Ask ENR →
Sponsored Content is a special paid section where industry companies provide high quality, objective, non-commercial content around topics of interest to the ENR audience. All Sponsored Content is supplied by the advertising company and any opinions expressed in this article are those of the author and not necessarily reflect the views of ENR or its parent company, BNP Media. Interested in participating in our Sponsored Content section? Contact your local rep!
Join ENR's NY/NJ Infrastructure Forum on September 14 at Pier Sixty in NYC to hear from top public agency officials on capital plans and connect with MWBE contractors to uncover major partnership and bidding opportunities across the Northeast. Gain actionable insights to navigate regulatory uncertainty and position your firm for infrastructure success.
Join ENR’s Seattle Infrastructure Forum on October 14 at the Westin Seattle to connect with key decision-makers from Sound Transit, WSDOT, and the Port of Seattle. Gain early insight into billions in capital projects and strategic opportunities across the Puget Sound region’s booming infrastructure market.
AIRPORTS, PARKING GARAGES AND DECKS TODAY View all Special Ad Sections Archives
Copyright ©2026. All Rights Reserved BNP Media, Inc. and BNP Media II, LLC.
Design, CMS, Hosting & Web Development :: ePublishing
PROJECTS Buildings Construction Methods Design Sustainability Transportation Environment Power & Industrial Water & Dams Best Projects Pulse
BUSINESS Safety & Health Workforce Construction Inclusion Finance Companies Project Delivery Ethics & Corruption Government Risk Contractor Business Strategy
TALENT Awards Top 25 Newsmakers Award of Excellence Legacy Award Top Young Professionals Promotions & New Hires Obituaries Annual Photo Contest
Awards Top 25 Newsmakers Award of Excellence Legacy Award Top Young Professionals
REGIONS ENR East ENR Midwest ENR Mountain States & Southwest ENR Texas & Southeast ENR West Regional Contests and Surveys
TECH Information Technology Construction Technology BIM
PRODUCTS Equipment Materials Featured Products
IDEAS Blogs Editorials Viewpoints Letters Book Reviews ENR History
COSTS Weekly Construction Economics Reports Quarterly Cost Reports Construction Cost Data Dashboard Construction Cost Index Building Cost Index Historical Indexes FAQs
LISTS ENR Top Lists ENR Sourcebooks Survey Schedule 2026 Top 100/400/500 Survey
INFOCENTERS Trends In Workforce Development
EVENTS Award of Excellence Best of the Best Project Awards FutureTech Groundbreaking Women in Construction WEST Global Best Projects Awards LA Infrastructure Forum NY/NJ Infrastructure Forum Regional Best Projects Seattle Infrastructure Forum Top 25 Newsmakers Upcoming Events Webinars
Groundbreaking Women in Construction WEST
MORE About Contact Us Advertise Social Media Channels Best Project Award Contests Global Regional CE Center Digital Editions ENR Book Store Industry Jobs Podcasts Proposals & Bids Special Advertising Sections Subscribe Videos Year In Construction Photo Contest Sponsor Insights Interactive Spotlights eBooks
About Contact Us Advertise Social Media Channels
Best Project Award Contests Global Regional
Sponsored by Procore The Scalability Secret: Unlocking Business Continuity Through Tech Stacks
Sponsored by Procore A Lasting Advantage: Future-Proofing General Contractors
Sponsored by Procore Connected Construction: Transforming the Industry Through Integration
FPL Announces Plans to Install 30 Million Solar Panels in Florida See More
Firm Plans to Build New LNG Terminal at Port Fourchon, La. See More
Invenergy Plans to Build $220M Ohio Solar Panel Plant See More
RESOURCES Advertise Contact Us Store Photo Submissions
Account Center Create an Account Start a Subscription Manage My Account Sign Up for Newsletters Visit Customer Service Update Preferences About ENR UNLIMITED
SERVICES Marketing Services Reprints Market Research List Rental Survey/Respondent Access
STAY CONNECTED LinkedIn Facebook Instagram YouTube X
Privacy PRIVACY POLICY TERMS & CONDITIONS DO NOT SELL MY PERSONAL INFORMATION PRIVACY REQUEST ACCESSIBILITY UPDATE MY PREFERENCES