Title: Heavy precipitation hitting vulnerable communities in the UAE and…
URL: https://climateanalytics.org/publications/heavy-precipitation-hitting-vulnerable-communities-in-the-uae-and-oman-becoming-an-increasing-threat-as-the-climate-warms
Source Type: html
Domain: climateanalytics.org
Content Type: text/html; charset=UTF-8
Search Query: UAE national climate adaptation plan flood

Climate Analytics | Heavy precipitation hitting vulnerable…

Heavy precipitation hitting vulnerable communities in the UAE and Oman becoming an increasing threat as the climate warms
Decarbonisation targets and 1.5°C pathways
Combating heat stress through urban planning: Integrated case studies for Lisbon and Islamabad
Extreme heat risks in Germany: priorities for adaptation and preparedness
Troubled waters: risks and realities of blue carbon in climate action
Projections of climate change vulnerability along the Shared Socioeconomic Pathways 2020–2100
Latest science on the 1.5°C limit of the Paris Agreement
Climate overshoot implications for local adaptation planning
Reversal of the impact chain for actionable climate information
Humid heat exceeds human tolerance limits and causes mass mortality
Spatially resolved emulated annual temperature projections for overshoot pathways
Geological Net Zero and the need for disaggregated accounting for carbon sinks
The role of northern forests in limiting warming to 1.5°C
Rapid urbanisation and climate change key drivers of dramatic flood impacts in Nepal
Climate Analytics is a global climate science and policy institute engaged around the world in driving and supporting climate action aligned to the 1.5°C warming limit.
To help governments, civil society and the private sector understand the pace of change required, we develop new methods to calculate the emission reductions needed to decarbonise in line with this planetary limit.
Mariam Zachariah, Joyce Kimutai, Clair Barnes, Edward Gryspeerdt, Sonia Seneviratne, Mansour Almazroui, Robert Vautard, Xuebin Zhang, Izidine Pinto, Maja Vahlberg, Sayanti Sengupta, Fahad Saeed , Friederike Otto
From April 14–15 2024, the United Arab Emirates (UAE) and the northern parts of Oman were hit by exceptionally heavy rainfall causing massive disruption in infrastructure and public life in the area and leading to at least 20 fatalities in Oman and four in the UAE.
The extreme rainfall event was associated with a low-pressure system, initially originating from mid latitude Eastern Europe, that induced violent storms, also bringing heavy rainfall to other parts of Asia.
In Dubai, most of the rain fell on Monday 15th of April and exceeded all previous records of daily rainfall in the last 75 years, when records began ( UAE government, 2024 ).
Researchers from Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, Switzerland, the Netherlands, Sweden, the United States, Canada, France and the United Kingdom collaborated to assess to what extent human-induced climate change altered the likelihood and intensity of the weather conditions at the time of the most impactful floods.
To characterise the event we focus on daily maximum precipitation (RX1day). As this event was the highest on record we also looked at the annual maximum, which usually falls within this season. Using this RX1day variable has the additional advantage that it is one of the routinely calculated indices in most climate projections, thus making it easy to compare our analysis with published literature. For the spatial definition of the event we analysed the region that saw the biggest impacts during the 1-day heavy rainfall event, indicated by the red box in Figure 1. The region includes the UAE, the northern part of Oman, Bahrain and a small part of Saudi Arabia.
(Cover image: Dubai on Wednesday 17 April. Areas of flooding are highlighted in turquoise. Image taken by Copernicus Sentinel-2 (CC BY-SA 3.0 IGO)
New peer-reviewed study examines the effectiveness of nature-based adaptation solutions to combat heat stress and high temperatures in Lisbon and Islamabad. Local stakeholders were involved in the design of the urban nature-based solutions, which were found to offer localised respite from heat stress by up to 40% during the day, mainly by providing shading from direct sunlight and by reducing land surface temperatures.
Report finds that heat extremes are projected to rise significantly across German cities this century, with levels strongly determined by global climate change mitigation efforts. The report highlights on seven urban areas: Berlin, Frankfurt am Main (Frankfurt a. M.), Cologne, Düsseldorf, Munich, Leipzig, and Hamburg.
Carbon stored in coastal and marine ecosystems, such as mangroves, salt marshes, and seagrass meadows (blue carbon) is viewed as a potential bridge between mitigation, adaptation, and climate finance. However, as this brief explores, the viability of blue carbon as a mitigation option is questionable due to the fragility of these systems and the use of blue carbon as offsets counterproductive.
As climate change continues to accelerate, its multifaceted impacts will affect societies across the globe in increasingly complex and uneven ways. This study provides a comprehensive assessment of how socioeconomic factors interact with climate vulnerability up to the year 2100.
This briefing provides a comprehensive overview of what the science is saying now about the 1.5°C warming limit – what it means, what is at stake, and what actions are needed to limit the risks of overshoot and safeguard a liveable future.
New perspective piece argues climate overshoot – the temporary exceedance of the 1.5°C limit of the Paris Agreement – may not be relevant for short-term adaptation planning, but it should be considered for long-term plans and policies, such as infrastructure-based measures and for irreversible impacts such as sea-level rise.
This study helps local decision-makers understand the link between the risks they want to avoid (i.e. health-related heat risks) and CO2 emissions using a new method that makes identifying critical risk levels easier for non-scientists.
With critical physiological limits to human heat tolerance drawing ever closer, this Comment highlights the urgent need to limit further climate warming and emphasises the adaptation challenge ahead.
This study presents a new dataset of annual temperature projections for different overshoot pathways (when the 1.5 °C of global warming limit is exceeded). The data offers a unique opportunity to study local and regional climate change impacts of a range of overshoot scenarios, including when temperature thresholds might be exceeded, and by how much.
This study in Nature show that definitions of net zero now in widespread use will not actually stop global warming. The paper demonstrates that relying on natural carbon sinks, such as in forests or oceans, to 'offset' ongoing fossil fuel emissions will lead to continued warming.
Northern forests are critical in the race to net zero CO₂ by mid-century. Protecting and restoring these forests, alongside steep and rapid reductions in fossil fuel emissions, is essential both to mitigating emissions and to supporting forest ecosystem services and biodiversity.
New study finds the devastating floods in Nepal late September were exacerbated by rapid urbanisation and climate change. The analysis found the relentless rain, which fell on saturated ground in the late monsoon, was made at least 10% heavier and 70% more likely by climate change.
Delivering cutting-edge science, analysis and support to accelerate climate action and keep warming below 1.5°C.
By signing up for our newsletter you agree to our Ts & Cs and Privacy Policy
Copyright © 2026 Climate Analytics. All rights reserved. Site design by Enovate .
About us About us The team Work with us Funders Annual reports Contact and offices Caribbean office South Asia office Australia and Pacific office Africa office North America office Headquarters office About us Climate Analytics is a global climate science and policy institute engaged around the world in driving and supporting climate action aligned to the 1.5°C warming limit.
Contact and offices Caribbean office South Asia office Australia and Pacific office Africa office North America office Headquarters office
Our work Climate impacts and risks Adaptation Loss and damage Decarbonisation targets and 1.5°C pathways Climate finance Climate diplomacy Climate justice The 1.5°C limit Decarbonisation targets and 1.5°C pathways To help governments, civil society and the private sector understand the pace of change required, we develop new methods to calculate the emission reductions needed to decarbonise in line with this planetary limit.
Decarbonisation targets and 1.5°C pathways
News and events Comment Events Press releases Media coverage Comment Insights and expert analysis on climate issues.
> Heavy precipitation hitting vulnerable communities in the UAE and Oman becoming an increasing threat as the climate warms
The UAE, Oman and the wider analysed region are located in a so-called hyper-arid region, with on average very little rainfall but with very high variability from year to year. Thus heavy rainfall events such as the one analysed here occur very rarely, leading to short records of similar events which results in high uncertainty in the assessment.
The El Niño Southern Oscillation, a naturally occurring climate phenomenon, was found to be important to