Title: 2025 Investment Climate Statements: United Arab Emirates
URL: https://www.state.gov/reports/2025-investment-climate-statements/united-arab-emirates
Source Type: html
Domain: state.gov
Content Type: text/html; charset=UTF-8
Search Query: UAE infrastructure investment climate resilience budget 2025

United Arab Emirates - United States Department of State

2025 Investment Climate Statements: United Arab Emirates
Openness to, and Restrictions upon, Foreign Investment
Bilateral Investment and Taxation Treaties
U.S. International Development Finance Corporation (DFC)and Other Investment Insurance or Development Finance Programs
Policies toward Foreign Direct Investment
Limits on Foreign Control and Right to Private Ownership and Establishment
Laws and Regulations on Foreign Direct Investment
Foreign Trade Zones/Free Ports/Trade Facilitation
Performance and Data Localization Requirements
Capital Markets and Portfolio Investment
The Government of the United Arab Emirates (UAE) continues to pursue economic diversification and regulatory reforms to promote private sector development, reduce dependence on hydrocarbon revenues, and build a knowledge economy buttressed by advanced technology and clean energy. Trade and investment are integral elements of that strategy.
The United States is the leading destination for UAE investments. In March 2025, the UAE committed to a 10-year, $1.4 trillion investment framework focusing on AI, frontier technologies, energy, and manufacturing. This investment framework was in addition to considerable cumulative investments of nearly equal size that the UAE already had in the United States.
The UAE serves as a major trade and investment hub for the Middle East and North Africa, and increasingly for:
The UAE seeks to attract foreign direct investment (FDI) and talent by:
In April 2025, the Ministry of Finance laid out criteria on how to assess a non-resident person’s ties to the UAE for the purposes of the taxation of corporations and businesses.
In March 2025, the UAE Federal Cabinet approved the National Investment Strategy to more than double annual FDI into the economy by 2031. In January 2024, the Cabinet established five economic priorities:
In July 2023, the UAE established a new federal Ministry of Investment to streamline and align investment policies of individual emirates under a unified investment strategy and to enhance the competitiveness of related policies and procedures. In September 2024, the UAE issued the National Strategy for Anti-Money Laundering, following the Financial Action Task Force’s (FATF) removal of the UAE from its grey list in February 2024. In August 2024, the government issued Federal Decree Law No. 7 of 2024 amending some provisions of Federal Decree Law No. 20 of 2018 regarding Combating Money Laundering Crimes, the Financing of Terrorism, and the Financing of Illegal Organizations. The new decree aims to strengthen the legal framework for combating financial crimes and enhance the compliance with international standards and treaties.
The UAE continued to attract high net worth individuals, with a projected net inflow of over 6,700 millionaires in 2024. Driven by this wealth influx, and particularly by demand from Indian, British, and Pakistani nationals, Dubai’s property market remained strong in 2024. During the first half of 2024, there was a 62 percent growth in the wealth management sector of Dubai’s financial hub, according to the Dubai Financial Services Authority (DFSA).
Over the past several years, the UAE federal government and the country’s seven emirates have passed numerous initiatives, laws, and regulations to attract more foreign investment. Recent measures include:
In September 2023, the UAE introduced an optional savings program for private sector and free zone employees to contribute up to 25 percent of their income to an investment account and receive employer contributions of between 5.83 percent and 8.33 percent. In 2022, the UAE formally changed its work week for government employees and most corporate staff to Monday through Thursday with a half-day on Friday, more closely aligning with markets outside the region. The UAE’s landmark 2021 Data Protection Law, which developed the legal frameworks around data privacy, investment, regulation and legal protection of industrial property, copyrights, trademarks, and residency also went into effect in 2022. However, the government has yet to issue regulations regarding implementation of the law. Together, these economic development reforms offer both challenges and opportunities for foreign investors. While U.S. companies broadly consider these reforms to be positive, investors should carefully consider the implications on their particular operations.
In December 2024, the UAE updated specific provisions of the Corporate Income Tax Law on business profits. Following the issuance of Cabinet Decision No. 142 of 2024, a Domestic Minimum Top-up Tax (DMTT) went into effect for fiscal years starting on or after January 1, 2025. This aligns the UAE with the OECD/G20 global minimum tax framework by imposing a top-up tax, the DMTT, on multinational enterprises (MNEs) operating in the UAE if their effective tax rate falls below 15 percent. The Federal Decree Law No. 47 of 2022 imposed a standard rate of nine percent on taxable profits exceeding $102,000. Marking the first imposition of corporate taxes in the country’s history, the law represented a significant change to the UAE tax landscape. It affects all businesses, including free zone entities, but exempts state-owned companies, extractive industries, pension funds, and investment funds.
In September 2023, the UAE issued Federal Decree Law No. 36 on the Regulation of Competition (often referred to as the New Competition Law), to replace Federal Decree Law No. 4 of 2012. The New Competition Law extended its jurisdiction to include practices taking place overseas that affect the UAE market and expanded its definition to include the digital economy. The new law removed previous sectoral exemptions and clarified that government entities can only be exempted from the law by explicit government decisions. The New Competition Law broadened the interpretation of anti-competitive conduct and introduced new tests for mandatory merger controls based on the increased level of concentration in a given market.
In September 2024, the Ministry of Economy issued a decision mandating private joint stock companies to ensure women’s representation on their boards of directors.
The UAE continues to refine its FDI policies. In April 2025, the Ministry of Finance issued Cabinet Decision No. 35 of 2025, outlining when non-resident judicial investors in Qualifying Investment Funds (QIF) or Real Estate Investment Trusts (REIT) have taxable ties to the UAE. This decision aims to reduce compliance burdens for foreign investors. In March 2025, the Cabinet approved National Investment Strategy 2031 aiming to more than double total foreign investment inflows from $30.5 billion in 2023 to $65.3 billion by 2031. The strategy focuses on key sectors such as industry, logistics, financial services, renewable energy, and information technology.
In September 2024, the UAE issued Federal Decree Law No. 26 repealing the Anti-Fronting Law No. 17 of 2004, taking effect on October 1, 2024. This change removed restrictions that limited foreign investors from informally controlling businesses through local sponsors.
Under Federal Decree Law No. 26 of 2020, the “Commercial Companies Law,” onshore UAE companies are no longer required to have a UAE national or a Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) national as a majority shareholder. In addition, UAE joint stock companies are no longer required to be chaired by an Emirati citizen or have Emirati citizens make up the majority of their boards. Local branches of foreign companies are no longer required to have a UAE national, or a UAE-owned company, act as an agent. With the lifting of federal regulations on majority ownership of onshore businesses, individual emirates started publishing lists of eligible business activities for foreign investment. In March 2021, an intra-emirate committee recommended a list of strategically important sectors requiring additional licensing restrictions. The Abu Dhabi Department of Economic Development (ADDED) published in May 2021 a list of 1,105 commercial and industrial business activities that are eligible for 100 percent foreign ownership, effective June 2021. In reporting on new business licenses, ADDED does not provide disaggregated data, making it unclear how successful this reform has been in driving new foreign-owned businesses. In June 2021, the Dubai government published guidelines for full ownership procedures for more than 1,000 commercial and industrial activities.
The UAE Federal Law No. 3 of 2022 on regulating commercial agencies came into effect in June 2023. The new law replaced a 1981 law, which required foreign companies to partner with an Emirati local agent to establish distribution operations of their products in the country. The new law allows any international company to act as its own agent for its own products in new commercial endeavors. The new law also expands the right to act as a commercial agent beyond UAE citizens and public joint stock companies with