Title: UAE Climate Risk Assessment & Adaptation Measures in Key ...
URL: https://gggi.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/uae-climate-risk-assessment-and-adaptation-measures-in-key-sectors.pdf
Source Type: pdf
Domain: gggi.org
Content Type: application/pdf
Search Query: UAE national climate adaptation plan flood resilience infrastructure

UAE Climate Risk Assessment & Adaptation Measures in Key Sectors 2019 www.moccae.gov.ae Health, Energy, Infrastructure & Environment National Climate Change Adaptation Program
UAE Climate Risk Assessment & Adaptation Measures in Key Sectors 2019 Health, Energy, Infrastructure & Environment National Climate Change Adaptation Program
3 UAE Climate Risk Assessment & Adaptation Measures in Key Sectors 2 Federal Government Ministry of Economy Ministry of Energy and Industry Ministry of Finance Ministry of Health and Prevention Ministry of Infrastructure Development Prime Minister’s Office Emirates Authority for Standardization & Metrology Federal Electricity and Water Authority Federal Transport Authority General Authority of Ports, Borders and Free Zones Security General Civil Aviation Authority National Center of Meteorology National Emergency Crisis & Disasters Management Authority Local Government Department of Energy - Abu Dhabi Department of Health - Abu Dhabi Department of Transport - Abu Dhabi Department of Urban Planning and Municipalities - Abu Dhabi Environment Agency – Abu Dhabi Dubai Airports Dubai Electricity and Water Authority Dubai Health Authority Dubai Municipality Dubai RSB Road and Transport Authority - Dubai Supreme Council of Energy - Dubai Environment & Protected Areas Authority - Sharjah Sharjah Airport Authority Sharjah Electricity and Water Authority Sharjah Municipal Affairs, Agriculture & Livestock Department Sharjah Municipality Urban Planing Council – Sharjah Environmental Protection and Development Authority – Ras Al Khaimah Public Works & Services Department - Ras Al Khaimah Ras Al Khaimah Municipality Waste Management Authority - Ras Al Khaimah Fujairah Municipality Ajman Municipality and Planning Department Umm Al Quwain Municipality Dibba Municipality Private Sector ADNOC Arup Dnata Group Dubai Carbon Emirates Airline Enerwhere Engie ENOC Etihad Energy Services First Abu Dhabi Bank Mott MacDonald academic institutions American University Dubai American University of Ras Al Khaimah American University of Sharjah Khalifa University of Science and Technology Mohammed Bin Rashid School of Government Mohammed Bin Rashid University New York University Abu Dhabi Sharjah University United Arab Emirates University Zayed University Other Abu Dhabi Global Environmental Data Initiative Emirates Nature - WWF Acknowledgements This report was developed by the United Arab Emirates’ Ministry of Climate Change and Environment (MoCCaE), with technical support from the Global Green Growth Institute (GGGI). It was developed based on international benchmarking, sectoral background papers, publically available data and research, and a series of group and bilateral consultation meetings with experts and representatives from the government, private sector, and academic institutes as indicated below. Their contributions are greatly acknowledged.
5 UAE Climate Risk Assessment & Adaptation Measures in Key Sectors 4 Foreword Looking ahead, the completion of the risk assessment only marks the start of our continuous effort to pursue adaptation at all levels of society. Since risk assessment is an iterative process, we will update our analysis based on available new information. We will also work with our partners to make quality data and research more available to help us better understand the climate risks. I hope that this report serves as an inspiration for more action by all of us; whether in government, companies, schools, universities, or households. Our success lies in the active engagement of all stakeholders, to whom I extend my sincere appreciation for their valuable contribution and I look forward to our stronger collaboration in the coming years. H.E. Dr. Thani Bin Ahmed Al Zeyoudi Minister of Climate Change & Environment In September of 2017, we launched the National Climate Change Adaptation Program during the UAE Government Annual Meetings. The Program aims to assess the impacts of climate change on key sectors and identify the climate risks that demand urgent action. By doing this, we strive to make the UAE one of the most climate-resilient countries in the world. To identify the most effective adaptation measures for the UAE, the Ministry of Climate Change and Environment conducted risk assessment on four priority sectors: health, energy, infrastructure, and environment, based on review of available research, participatory stakeholder consultation, and expert inputs. Our analysis reveals that the UAE is indeed facing climate risks, which if left unattended, can pose development challenges. Nevertheless, resilience has been embedded in the UAE’s history and culture as proven by our ability to cope with and overcome the harsh desert environment for centuries. It is also worth noting that the UAE is already implementing a wide range of adaptation measures in different sectors, which put us in a good position, but further innovative ideas and action would be required to further transform climate challenges into opportunities.
7 UAE Climate Risk Assessment & Adaptation Measures in Key Sectors 6 Table of Contents Overview 08 1. How will climate change affect the UAE? 11 2. What is the UAE’s approach to climate change? 13 3. What are the priority climate risks to the UAE? 15 4. How is the UAE addressing climate risks? 18 5. What is the next step for advancing adaptation? 22 This document is a synthesis of the UAE’s climate risk assessment conducted in its four key sectors – health, energy, infrastructure, and the environment – as the first step to implement the National Climate Change Adaptation Program. For the details on each sector’s assessment results and methodology, the following documents are available from: www.moccae.gov.ae. UAE Sectoral Climate Risk Assessment Framework Adaptation of the UAE’s Public Health to Climate Change Adaptation of the UAE’s Energy Sector to Climate Change Adaptation of the UAE’s Infrastructure to Climate Change Adaptation of the UAE’s Environment to Climate Change
9 UAE Climate Risk Assessment & Adaptation Measures in Key Sectors 8 While the UAE is well adapted to its harsh desert conditions and has remarkably prospered in spite of its climate, future climate change may impose new and overwhelming pressures on the country’s environment, economy, and society. Climate projections for the UAE and the Gulf region reveal increased temperature and humidity levels, longer hot and humid seasons, more intense rainfall, higher seawater levels, and increased likelihood and scale of extreme weather events. The UAE government launched the National Climate Change Plan 2050 in 2017, a policy framework enabling the transition toward a climate-resilient green economy, while managing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, minimizing climate risks, and increasing adaptation capabilities. As the first step in implementing the Plan, the National Climate Change Adaptation Program was launched with the aim to make the UAE one of the most climate-resilient countries in the world. Subsequently, the Ministry of Climate Change and Environment (MOCCAE) conducted a comprehensive assessment of potential climate risks to the country. 10 priority climate risks for the UAE Overview Despite collective global efforts, greenhouse gas emissions continue to rise, causing significant threats to all sectors of our society. Timely and effective measures to adapt to climate change is now more important than ever. The climate risk assessment considered how climate change phenomena could affect four key sectors – human health, energy (electricity and heat), infrastructure, and the environment. Ten priority climate risks (shown in the figure below) were identified which were rated very high or high according to the risk assessment framework developed for this analysis. In designing adaptation measures to increase the priority climate risks, a range of existing initiatives that could be enhanced or refocused to increase climate resilience are identified in this report. New policies and actions are also proposed where relevant measures are missing or insufficient to address and manage the risks. The proposed adaptation measures will need to be further analyzed, prioritized, and implemented by relevant national and local entities as well as stakeholders in the subsequent phase of the National Climate Change Adaptation Program. Examples of existing and potential new measures are shown in the figure below. In the long term, climate change adaptation should be mainstreamed into national development planning and sectoral strategies. Equally important would be to improve climate science to gain more region-specific risk information. The success of climate change adaptation depends on the active engagement of all relevant stakeholders to work together toward a common goal of strengthening resilience and transforming climate risks into opportunities. Examples of existing and potential new measures for climate adaptation
11 UAE Climate Risk Asse