Title: Dubai approves 20% increase in infrastructure spending | MEED
URL: https://www.meed.com/dubai-approves-20-increase-in-infrastructure-spending
Source Type: html
Domain: meed.com
Content Type: text/html; charset=utf-8
Search Query: UAE municipal budget infrastructure spending 2025 2026

MEED | Dubai approves 20% increase in infrastructure spending

Dubai approves 20% increase in infrastructure spending
Inside Saudi Arabia’s water PPP ecosystem
Dubai has approved a 20% increase in infrastructure spending as part of its record AED99.5bn ($27.1bn) budget for 2026.
The spending for 2026 was approved alongside its largest-ever three-year general budget cycle covering 2026-28.
Saudi Arabia’s water PPP market has grown into one of the most structured and well-governed sectors for global developers, underpinned by institutional reforms, legal frameworks and digital tools that have systematically reduced the barriers to market entry.
Infrastructure investments account for 48% or AED47.8bn of total projected expenditure and cover roads, bridges, tunnels, public transport, sewage systems, parks, renewable energy facilities, waste management and service buildings. Last year, 46% of the total budget, or AED39.7bn, was allocated for infrastructure.
There are several major government infrastructure projects moving ahead in Dubai that will require billions of dollars of funding over the coming years. These include the $35bn expansion of Al-Maktoum International airport, the $4.9bn Blue Line extension to the Dubai Metro, and the $22bn Dubai Strategic Sewerage Tunnels (DSST) project, which is being developed on a public-private partnership basis. There has also been an uptick in the number of major road schemes under construction over the past three years.
The overall spending of AED99.5bn for 2026 is a 15% increase on the AED86.26bn of budgeted spending that was approved for 2024. Revenues for 2026 are projected at AED107.7bn, including AED5bn in general reserves. Based on these projections, Dubai’s Department of Finance (DOF) expects to achieve an operating surplus of up to 5% of the emirate’s projected GDP in 2026.
The 2026 budget was enacted under Law No. 15 of 2015 and approved by Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid Al-Maktoum, Vice-President and Prime Minister of the UAE, in his capacity as Ruler of Dubai.
The newly approved general budget cycle for 2026-28 sets total planned expenditure at AED302.7bn and total revenues at AED329.2bn. According to the DOF, this three-year framework constitutes the largest budget cycle in Dubai’s history, underscoring the emirate’s medium-term commitment to public investment and fiscal planning.
As well as infrastructure, spending priorities for 2026 show an emphasis on social development with a 20% increase in spending when compared to 2024.
Social development receives 28% of total spending, directed towards sectors including health, education, scientific research, housing, family welfare, youth and sports, as well as programmes for seniors, retirees and people of determination.
The government has allocated 18% of total expenditure to the security, justice and safety sector, aiming to maintain it as one of the emirate’s globally recognised strengths through enhanced preparedness and operational excellence.
A further 6% of spending is set aside for government development initiatives that support performance enhancement and promote a culture of excellence, innovation and creativity within public sector institutions.
Subscribe or upgrade your current MEED.com package to support your strategic planning with the MENA region’s best source of business information. Proceed to our online shop below to find out more about the features in each package.
Take advantage of our introductory offers below for new subscribers and purchase your access today! If you are an existing client, please reach out to your account manager.
© MEED MEDIA FZ LLC Company number 18693 (Dubai Creative Clusters Authority) Registered address: GBS building, 6th Floor, Al Falak Street, Dubai Media City, PO Box 25960, Dubai, UAE
Latest News Analysis Commentaries Interviews Infographics Meed Business Review
In depth Legal Leadership Market Talk Gulf Projects Index Monthly contract awards
Industries Banking and Finance Construction Tourism Manufacturing and Mining Oil and Gas Petrochemicals Power Water Technology and IT Transport Energy Transition
Countries Global Middle East Algeria Bahrain Egypt Iran Iraq Jordan Kuwait Lebanon Libya Morocco Oman Qatar Saudi Arabia Syria Tunisia UAE
Reports Premium Reports Industry Reports Market Reports
Services Awards MEED Projects Awards MENA Banking Excellence Awards Retail Banker International Asia Trailblazer Awards Private Banker International Global Wealth Awards Conferences Saudi Giga Projects 2026 MENA Construction Summit 2026 MEED Projects Marketing solutions Advertising Consulting MeedTV
Awards MEED Projects Awards MENA Banking Excellence Awards Retail Banker International Asia Trailblazer Awards Private Banker International Global Wealth Awards
Retail Banker International Asia Trailblazer Awards
Private Banker International Global Wealth Awards
Conferences Saudi Giga Projects 2026 MENA Construction Summit 2026
SIGN IN Your username or password is invalid. Please try again . username and/or password required. Your subscription has expired. The page you requested has generated an unexpected error. Remember Me Lost your password? Login OpenAthens Sign in with OpenAthens account ×