Title: National Climate Change Plan of the UAE 2017–2050
URL: https://u.ae/en/about-the-uae/strategies-initiatives-and-awards/strategies-plans-and-visions/environment-and-energy/national-climate-change-plan-of-the-uae
Source Type: html
Domain: u.ae
Content Type: text/html; charset=utf-8
Search Query: UAE climate change adaptation infrastructure investment

National Climate Change Plan of the UAE 2017–2050 | The Official Platform of the UAE Government

National Climate Change Plan of the UAE 2017–2050
Disclaimer: You are using Google Translate. The UAE mGovernment is not responsible for the accuracy of information in the translated language.
The primary objectives of the National Climate Change Plan of the UAE 2017–2050 are to m anage greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions while sustaining economic growth, minimise risks and improve capacity of adaptation to climate change and e nhance the UAE’s economic diversification agenda through innovative solutions.
The National Climate Change Plan of the UAE 2017–2050 (PDF, 1.55 MB) is the UAE’s comprehensive framework to address the causes and impacts of climate change, plan the transition into a climate resilient green economy and achieve a better quality of life. The primary objectives of the Climate Plan are to:
Manage greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions while sustaining economic growth - the UAE’s total GHG emissions are expected to continue rising with the projected economic and population growth. However, the Climate Change Plan aims to manage emissions and ensure that climate action supports achievement of the economic goals.
Minimise risks and improve capacity of adaptation to climate change - promoting a climate-resilient economy is a prerequisite for the UAE to realise the transformation outlined in the Vision 2021. A systematic and scientific assessment of climate risks and vulnerabilities is at the heart of the Climate Change Plan. It emphasises on the need to protect the economy, infrastructure, people and ecosystems from climate-related impacts.
Enhance the UAE’s economic diversification agenda through innovative solutions - as the UAE continues to invest in non-oil sectors with high growth potential, the Climate Change Plan will facilitate a stronger growth momentum in key emerging sectors. This will be achieved by deploying innovative measures to generate high added value for the emerging industries, encouraging job creations in green businesses and leveraging the mutual supportive relationship between climate action and economic diversification.
A. National GHG emissions management system
The UAE achieved great progress in managing and monitoring GHG emissions. The National Climate Change Plan gathers all local efforts on one platform and establishes a unified framework to measure emissions and provide reports. It seeks to establish an integrated system for monitoring, reporting and verifying the application of world’s best practices. A national system of climate information will be created to use emission data in scientific research and climate change forecasts at the national level.
B. National programmes for adaptation to climate change
Based on the expected climate changes and their results, the national development plans should be resilient enough at the local level. Proper measures should be taken to achieve high levels of readiness and manage current and future risks. The whole country started to assess risks and measure fragility level. It is necessary to plan adaptation with climate change covering all sectors at the national level. This planning should be based on scientific evidences and searches, taking into account the national development requirements.
C. Private sector-driven economic diversification programme
The private sector will play a critical role in advancing the UAE’s economic diversification agenda by enhancing the market of environmental goods and services. Businesses can be a source of innovation in addressing sustainability challenges, and they have huge potential to provide the necessary resources to advance the diversification agenda. To fulfil this priority, the government is required to provide an enabling environment for the private-sector through a combination of regulations and incentives.
Strategies, policies, initiatives and awards
National Climate Change Plan of the UAE 2017–2050
Manage greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions while sustaining economic growth - the UAE’s total GHG emissions are expected to continue rising with the projected economic and population growth. However, the Climate Change Plan aims to manage emissions and ensure that climate action supports achievement of the economic goals.
Minimise risks and improve capacity of adaptation to climate change - promoting a climate-resilient economy is a prerequisite for the UAE to realise the transformation outlined in the Vision 2021. A systematic and scientific assessment of climate risks and vulnerabilities is at the heart of the Climate Change Plan. It emphasises on the need to protect the economy, infrastructure, people and ecosystems from climate-related impacts.
Enhance the UAE’s economic diversification agenda through innovative solutions - as the UAE continues to invest in non-oil sectors with high growth potential, the Climate Change Plan will facilitate a stronger growth momentum in key emerging sectors. This will be achieved by deploying innovative measures to generate high added value for the emerging industries, encouraging job creations in green businesses and leveraging the mutual supportive relationship between climate action and economic diversification.