Title: 2026-08943.pdf - Federal Register
URL: https://public-inspection.federalregister.gov/2026-08943.pdf
Source Type: pdf
Domain: public-inspection.federalregister.gov
Content Type: application/pdf
Search Query: FAA UAM corridor Phase 1 guidelines for drone delivery 2026

BILLING CODE 4910-13-P DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION Federal Aviation Administration 14 CFR Parts 1, 74, 91, and 107 [Docket No. FAA-2026-4558; Notice No. 26-03] RIN 2120-AL33 Designation – Restrict the Operation of Unmanned Aircraft in Close Proximity to a Fixed Site Facility AGENCY: Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Department of Transportation (DOT). ACTION: Notice of proposed rulemaking (NPRM). SUMMARY: This action would implement section 2209, of the FAA Extension, Safety and Security Act of 2016, by establishing a process for operators and proprietors of certain fixed site facilities to request and maintain an unmanned aircraft flight restriction. The proposal also establishes requirements for applicants to demonstrate the unmanned aircraft flight restriction is necessary for: aviation safety, protection of people and property on the ground, national security, or homeland security. Lastly, the proposal identifies the types of operations that are allowed in the unmanned aircraft flight restriction UAFR. DATES: Send comments on or before [INSERT DATE 60 DAYS AFTER DATE OF PUBLICATION IN THE FEDERAL REGISTER]. ADDRESSES: Send comments identified by docket number FAA-2026-4558 using any of the following methods: • Federal eRulemaking Portal: Go to https://www.regulations.gov/ and follow the online instructions for sending your comments electronically. This document is scheduled to be published in the Federal Register on 2026-05-06 and available online at https://www.federalregister.gov/d/2026-08943, and on https://govinfo.gov
• Mail: Send comments to Docket Operations; U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT), 1200 New Jersey Avenue, S.E., Room W58-213, West Building 5th Floor, Washington, D.C. 20590-0001. • Hand Delivery or Courier: Take comments to Docket Operations in Room W58-213 of the West Building 5th Floor at 1200 New Jersey Avenue, S.E., Washington, D.C., between 9 a.m. and 5 p.m., Monday through Friday, except Federal holidays. • Fax: Fax comments to Docket Operations at (202) 493-2251. Docket: Background documents or comments received may be read at https://www.regulations.gov/ at any time. Follow the online instructions for accessing the docket or go to the Docket Operations in Room W58-213 of the West Building 5th Floor at 1200 New Jersey Avenue, S.E., Washington, D.C., between 9 a.m. and 5 p.m., Monday through Friday, except Federal holidays. FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Michelle Ferritto, Office of Rulemaking, Federal Aviation Administration, 800 Independence Avenue SW, Washington, DC 20591; Phone: (844) 359-6982; Email: 2209-UAFR@faa.gov. SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: I. Executive Summary A. Background B. What is a Standard Unmanned Aircraft Flight Restriction? C. What is a Special Unmanned Aircraft Flight Restriction D. Who Can Apply for an Unmanned Aircraft Flight Restriction? E. How Do I Apply for an Unmanned Aircraft Flight Restriction? F. What Happens after the UAFR goes into effect? G. Summary of the Costs and Benefits II. Authority for this Rulemaking III. Background and Statement of the Problem A. Background B. Statement of the problem IV. Overview of the Proposed Rule A. Introduction
B. What Is an Unmanned Aircraft Flight Restriction? V. Discussion of the Proposed Rule A. Definitions and Abbreviations (Part 1) B. General Provisions (Subpart A of Part 74) C. Minimum Requirements for Unmanned Aircraft Flight Restriction (Subpart B of Part 74) D. Sector-Specific Requirements (Subpart C of Part 74) E. FAA Evaluation, Approvals and Denial (Subparts D and E of Part 74) F. Reconsiderations (Subpart E of Part 74) G. Term, Amendments, Renewal, Modification, and Cancelation of Unmanned Aircraft Flight Restriction (Subpart F of Part 74) H. Access to Unmanned Aircraft Flight Restriction (Subpart G of Part 74) I. Parts 91 and 107 - Conforming Amendments VI. Regulatory Notices and Analyses A. Summary of the Regulatory Impact Analysis B. Regulatory Flexibility Act C. International Trade Impact Assessment D. Unfunded Mandates Assessment E. Paperwork Reduction Act F. International Compatibility G. Environmental Analysis VII. Executive Order Determinations A. Executive Order 13132, Federalism B. Executive Order 13175, Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribal Governments C. Executive Order 13211, Regulations that Significantly Affect Energy Supply, Distribution, or Use D. Executive Order 13609, Promoting International Regulatory Cooperation VIII. Privacy IX. Additional Information A. Comments Invited B. Confidential Business Information or Classified Information C. Electronic Access and Filing D. Small Business Regulatory Enforcement Fairness Act List of Abbreviations and Acronyms Frequently Used in This Document AC – Advisory Circular AGL – above ground level ATC – Air Traffic Control DOT – U.S. Department of Transportation FAA – Federal Aviation Administration
FAARA – FAA Reauthorization Act of 2018 FESSA – FAA Extension, Safety, and Security Act of 2016 LAANC – Low Altitude Authorization and Notification Capability NAS – National Airspace System NPRM – Notice of proposed rulemaking SSM – Security Sensitive Material TSA – Transportation Security Administration UA – unmanned aircraft UAFR – unmanned aircraft flight restriction UAS – unmanned aircraft system(s) I. Executive Summary A. Background Unmanned aircraft systems (UAS)1 are fundamentally changing aviation, and, as a part of its congressional mandate,2 FAA is working to integrate them into the airspace of the United States.3 The relatively low cost of highly capable UAS technology has triggered hundreds of thousands of new operators to enter the aviation community, some of whom have aviation knowledge and experience and many others who do not. The proliferation of these operations presents significant opportunities for innovation and growth and represents a driving force in the aviation sector. As the scale and scope of UAS activities has grown, some stakeholders have become concerned about the safety and security implications of unmanned aircraft (UA) flying in close proximity to certain types of facilities. These concerns led Congress to enact section 2209 of the FAA Extension, Safety and Security Act of 2016 (FESSA), directing FAA to create a system under which operators or
proprietors of certain fixed site facilities could request FAA to restrict unmanned aircraft operations in close proximity to those facilities. Congress identified the following for the process to apply to: critical infrastructure such as energy production, transmission, and distribution facilities and equipment; oil refineries, and chemical facilities; amusement parks; and “other locations that warrant such a restriction.”4 In the FAA Reauthorization Act of 2018 (FAARA), Congress amended section 2209 to include railroad facilities, and in the FAA Reauthorization Act of 2024, Congress again amended section 2209 to include State prisons. Congress said FAA may consider the following factors when considering a request for an unmanned aircraft flight restriction (UAFR): aviation safety; protection of people and property on the ground; national security; and homeland security. FAA proposes a new part 74 to implement this mandate and properly balance FAA’s other statutory mandates. Consistent with Executive Order 14305, Restoring American Airspace Sovereignty, FAA is proposing to limit facilities eligible for an UAFR to those that are fixed site facilities and meet the definition of critical infrastructure in 42 U.S.C. 5195c(e).5 Critical Infrastructure is defined as “systems and assets, whether physical or virtual, so vital to the United States that the incapacity or destruction of such systems and assets would have a debilitating effect on security, national economic security, national public health or safety, or any combination of those matters.”6 Additionally, FAA would consider whether an applicant could demonstrate that a UAFR is necessary for aviation safety, protection of people and property on the ground, national security, or homeland security. FAA proposes to limit UAFR eligibility to balance the safety and security concerns Congress identified in section 2209 with the national policy objectives of ensuring the public right of transit, preserving airspace efficiency, and integrating UAS into the NAS.
B. What is a Standard Unmanned Aircraft Flight Restriction? A UAFR under this proposal would be airspace with clearly defined horizontal and vertical limits within which unmanned aircraft would be restricted from operating unless the operation fell within a few narrow exceptions (as described in section V.H. of this preamble). The UAFR would not independently create a physical boundary or authorize operators or proprietors of the fixed site facility to establish a geo-fence or other electromagnetic boundary to prevent unauthorized access. However, if an operator or proprietor does possess independent authority to operate such equipment, this regulation does not prevent them from