Title: China's 15FYP Outlook for Water Security & Resiliency - CWR
URL: https://cwrrr.org/wp-content/uploads/2026/03/CWR-China-15FYP-Water-Outlook-2-Goals-4-Directives-8-Actions-FINAL-Mar-2026.pdf
Source Type: pdf
Domain: cwrrr.org
Content Type: application/pdf
Search Query: China 2026 flood disaster government investment plan urban drainage

1 China’s 15FYP Outlook for Water Security & Resiliency 2 Goals, 4 Directives, 8 Actions to prep for a new era of “Water B” 20th March 2026 – Hong Kong. 2026 marks the start of the 15th Five Year Plan 2026-2030 (15FYP) to accelerate China’s march towards “a great modern socialist country that is prosperous, strong, democratic, culturally advanced, harmonious and beautiful”. Water is an integral part of this … • Water is the backbone of national security = expect China to issue multiple detailed 15FYPs for water: It’s always hard to look for water at the start of the 15FYP but we will make a bold call now: there will be multiple detailed 15FYPs issued for water – from water security to water resilience for 2026-2030. These will be necessary to ensure China has water for growth & development as well as food & energy for the next 5 years despite escalating climate & water risks. • 2 Goals, 4 Directives & 8 Actions for water: these have business & finance implications: We’ve pored through the “mothership” 15FYP (just approved in the Two Sessions) as well as multiple Guiding Opinions & plans, major tasks and news announcements during the Two Sessions and throughout 2025. We’ve deciphered the tea leaves and distilled China’s direction of travel in water plus all-out efforts to “ensure water” and endure “water shocks” into: 2 Goals, 4 Directives & 8 Actions. These are must-reads beyond the water sector as they will impact every sector that needs water as an input in its supply chain + policies also create “little giants” and sizeable opportunities for investments as well as adaptation financing. • 15FYP has strong resilience thematic = signals getting ready for erratic water cycle & “Water B” ahead. The 2 Goals, 4 Directives & 8 Actions in the 15FYP also reveal how China will deal with an increasingly erratic water cycle as well as prepare for the onset of “Water B”, a new water era brought on by our rapidly deteriorating cryosphere. This is especially pertinent as the UN has just declared global water bankruptcy: we’ve irreversibly exhausted many critical water systems to the point that they’ll never be replenished to historic baselines. China’s 15FYP actions & budget to “tai chi” water around to avoid “water bankruptcy” are impressive. • Pollution control is still very much a priority, but we have not singled it out in the 8 Actions. This is because a lot of heavy lifting was done in the 12FYP, 13FYP & 14FYP. Since the “Water Ten Plan”, the proportion of surface water with good water quality (Grade I-III) has jumped from 63.1% in 2014 to 90.4% in 2024, while shares of the worst-quality water (Grade V) has fallen from 9.2% to 0.6%. Of note however, in this Two Sessions, is that China has passed the “Ecological and Environmental Protection Code of Laws” integrating 10 key environmental laws into a single code to avoid conflicts between fragmented law; further closing loopholes & strengthening punishment for polluters. The fact that this is the second “code of laws”; the first being The Civil Code of the People's Republic of China, underscores the importance of maintaining a Beautiful China. • Mountains-to-Oceans enshrined in the 15FYP; includes a nod to sea level rise. Another point of note is that the phrase “build a comprehensive protection and governance framework from mountaintops to the ocean” was enshrined in a Five-Year Pan for the first time, despite implementing mountains-to-oceans action ever since 12FYP. Interestingly, the 15FYP also urges active action to “prevent and respond to seawater intrusion”. This not only reaffirms an integrated approach but also recognises the onset of sea level rise (SLR). Indeed, China has been monitoring actual SLR on along its coast and has noticed that it’s been accelerating in the last few decades. Seas have risen 0.18m from 1900 to 2020 but according to China’s Ministry of Natural Resources, 0.14m of this was from 1980. While coastal protection action will feature in the 15FYP, likely dove tailing into the 2023 National Adaptation Plans, for this brief we have just looked at China’s freshwater actions.
2 2 Goals: Beautiful China & National Security … water is central to achieving these When most are asked “what do you think is China's foremost political priority”, many would say it’s advanced technology, military modernisation, geopolitics or the monumental task of managing the daily lives of 1.4 billion people – the answer is most likely not water. But to China, water is considered a key “backbone” of the economy, growth, national security & stability. China’s attitude & actions towards water management are determined and ambitious because water as China’s backbone cannot fail. So while the 15FYP is all about advancing faster and becoming self-reliant faster, this must be done without sacrificing the vision of a Beautiful China AND national security and stability must be maintained always. So, the water in the 15FYP is key to achieving the 2 over-arching goals: 1) “Beautiful China” & 2) “national security”: 1. Water is integral to achieving a Beautiful China – as Premier Li Qiang reports for 2025: “Efforts to conserve major rivers and important lakes and reservoirs were intensified, and the share of surface water with a good quality rating reached 91.4%. Initiatives were launched to build pilot zones under the Beautiful China Initiative”. “Major tasks” going forward include black malodorous water bodies to be cleaned up as part of the “fresh headway” to “be made in keeping our skies blue, waters clear, and lands clean”. More importantly, Li added that a “holistic and systematic approach to the conservation and improvement of mountain, water, forest, farmland, grassland, and desert ecosystems. We will integrate and optimise protected areas and continue to develop national parks”. 2. Water is a key ingredient of national security – A major task under “We will safeguard national security and social stability” is “to make critical infrastructure intrinsically safer”. Clearly water is a critical infrastructure and here, Li singled out that “The development of a modern water network will be accelerated, and the support system for catastrophe insurance will be improved.” The Premier also impressed that “Steps will be taken to strengthen the monitoring, forecasting, and early warning of meteorological, hydrological, and geological disasters, forest and grassland fires, and earthquakes” and pointed out that “weak links in flood prevention, drainage and disaster response” will be addressed in northern China. To achieve these 2 goals, China will step up action across 4 Directives with 8 Actions: 4 Directives to up water security & resilience 1. Protect important river source regions & watersheds 2. Control water use nationally, regionally, provincially + by sector 3. Boost water supply & resilience 4. Withstand shocks from acute & chronic risks 8 Actions that impact multiple sectors, business & finance 1. Decouple water use & economic growth 2. Create “little giants” in water savings 3. More resilient water infrastructure 4. More complex grand diversion projects 5. “Spongier” cities 6. Digital twins v2.0 7. Safeguarding watersheds 8. Dams, dams & more dams As some of these 8 Actions help achieve multiple directives, the budget allocated to achieve these is larger than expected. How these are interlinked are set out in the table on the following page and we deep dive into each of the 8 actions in the rest of the brief.
3 15FYP: 2 Goals, 4 Directives & 8 Actions for Water 2 Goals: Beautiful China & National Water Security 8 Key Actions expected in the 15FYP Protect watersheds Control water use Boost water supply Withstand shocks 1. China has decoupled water use & GDP GDP more than doubled but water use fell by 20bn m3 in the 14FYP     2. Create “little giants” in water savings China sets further waternomic cuts of 10% by 2030 but 2026 GDP growth at 4.5-5%     3. More resilient water infrastructure Expect to see much more spending on water infra in the 15FYP vs 14FYP     4. More complex grand diversion projects Resolving mismatches in water, people, GDP & resources increases water security   5. “Spongier” cities More than 80% of the urban built-up area must be “spongier” by 2030   6. Digital twins v.2.0 CNY597mn spent on Yangtze digital twin to optimise flows by 2027; expect v.2.0 by 2030     7. Safeguarding watersheds Multi-year mountains-to-oceans water ecological protection & restoration     8. Dams, dams & more dams Pump storage expansion & shares to rise by 2030 to up resilience    We recommend you read this brief together with our article on “15FYP New Era of Self Reliance: More Water for National Security”.
4 China has decoupled water use & economic growth! … GDP more than doubled but water use fell by 20bn m3 in the 14FYP Water is a crucial ingredient for development and China’s limited water resources could limit its economic growth. It was this real liquidity constrai