Title: The Strait of Hormuz in 8 Charts - CSIS
URL: https://www.csis.org/analysis/strait-hormuz-8-charts
Source Type: html
Domain: csis.org
Content Type: text/html; charset=UTF-8
Search Query: Strait of Hormuz oil flow 2025

The Strait of Hormuz in 8 Charts

Can AI and Reindustrialization Open New Pathways to Wealth for All? | Betting on America
Takeaways from the 2026 International AIDS Conference
Strategic Landpower Dialogue: A Conversation with General Eirik Kristoffersen
The Implications of the Hormuz Energy Crisis in China
No One, Not Even Beijing, Is Getting Through the Strait of Hormuz
Photo: Fabio Murgia/CSIS, assets from Wikimedia Commons
Commentary by Matthew P. Funaiole , Harrison Prétat , Aidan Powers-Riggs , and Jasper Verschuur
Access to the Strait of Hormuz, which carries roughly a quarter of global oil flows, remains contested. The waterway has been effectively closed since March 2, following U.S. and Israeli strikes on Iran. Although Tehran declared the strait open on April 17, the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps reversed course and announced it shut just one day later. The United States has since moved to enforce its own presence, including by seizing an Iranian-flagged cargo vessel on April 19. Vessel tracking and maritime trade data offer key insights into the ongoing dispute.
Since the conflict in Iran began, hundreds of tankers have been stranded in the Persian Gulf. After Iran’s foreign minister announced the reopening on April 17, dozens of vessels surged toward the Strait of Hormuz, trying to exit. Automatic identification system (AIS) data from Starboard Maritime Intelligence shows that most quickly reversed course and remain stuck in the Persian Gulf, but at least 13 tankers made it through.
Daily transits of the strait remain well below pre-conflict levels. While some vessels may be operating “dark,” with AIS transponders switched off and therefore not captured in the data, commercial traffic through the strait largely has not recovered.
Of the 187 vessels that have successfully transited the strait since March 4, over half are operated by shipping companies located in just four countries. China’s position at the top of that list is notable, given reports that Beijing has pressed Tehran to protect Chinese shipping.
Commercial shipping passing through Hormuz appears increasingly subject to Iranian conditions. Reporting suggests that some vessels are coordinating through designated intermediaries, sharing detailed voyage information, and in some cases paying additional fees to transit. Ships are also increasingly moving along preapproved routes closer to Iranian waters. Since March 15, most observed transits have followed these patterns.
Most of the trade (by value) moving through Hormuz is tied to a handful of economies. Gulf exporters depend on Hormuz to move the bulk of their output, while major Asian economies rely on it for energy imports. Many of the most exposed countries are key U.S. security partners.
The crisis is pushing up prices for commodities tied to Gulf exports. Crude oil and fertilizer prices have risen sharply, reflecting the region’s central role in global supply chains. Grain, by contrast, has not yet experienced comparable price spikes seen in recent shocks. Sustained increases in energy and fertilizer prices could affect global food production prices over time. Higher energy costs are already increasing food prices in some markets.
Since the crisis began, natural gas prices in Europe and Asia have risen sharply and remain elevated, reflecting their exposure to the ongoing disruption of maritime trade in the Persian Gulf. The United States, by contrast, is buffered by abundant domestic production, keeping prices relatively steady and leaving it better insulated than many of its allies.
The Strait of Hormuz carries a smaller share of total seaborne trade than some other major chokepoints, but it remains a key conduit for global energy flows. Traffic moving into and out of the Persian Gulf cannot easily reroute when disruptions occur, leaving hundreds of vessels and billions of dollars in goods stranded since the conflict began. The ongoing disruption underscores the importance of keeping critical maritime trade routes open and secure.
Commentary is produced by the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), a private, tax-exempt institution focusing on international public policy issues. Its research is nonpartisan and nonproprietary. CSIS does not take specific policy positions. Accordingly, all views, positions, and conclusions expressed in this publication should be understood to be solely those of the author(s).
© 2026 by the Center for Strategic and International Studies. All rights reserved.
Commentary by Harrison Prétat, Monica Sato, Aidan Powers-Riggs, and Matthew P. Funaiole — March 6, 2026
Center for Strategic and International Studies 1616 Rhode Island Avenue, NW Washington, DC 20036 Tel: 202.887.0200 Fax: 202.775.3199
See Media Page for more interview, contact, and citation details.
For general external relations inquires unrelated to media, please contact [email protected] .
©2026 Center for Strategic & International Studies. All Rights Reserved.
Intelligence, National Security, and Technology Program
Warfare, Irregular Threats, and Terrorism Program
Chair on India and Emerging Asia Economics
Economics Program and Scholl Chair in International Business
Energy Security and Climate Change Program
Sustainable Development and Resilience Initiative