Title: Gulf war risk premiums topping double-digit millions of dollars per trip
URL: https://www.lloydslist.com/LL1156586/Gulf-war-risk-premiums-topping-double-digit-millions-of-dollars-per-trip
Source Type: html
Domain: lloydslist.com
Content Type: text/html; charset=utf-8
Search Query: war risk insurance premium Gulf 2025

Gulf war risk premiums topping double-digit millions of dollars per trip :: Lloyd's List

Gulf war risk premiums topping double-digit millions of dollars per trip
Quotes for high-risk vessels could already be at 10% of hull value But safer ‘plain vanilla’ propositions priced far lower Rates almost certain to go higher still after Mayuree Naree strike
No, P&I clubs have not ‘cancelled war risk cover’
Three seafarers missing in Middle East Gulf strikes
You must sign in to use this functionality
Lloyd's List is part of Maritime Intelligence
This site is operated by a business or businesses owned by Maritime Insights & Intelligence Limited, registered in England and Wales with company number 13831625 and address c/o Hackwood Secretaries Limited, One Silk Street, London EC2Y 8HQ, United Kingdom. Lloyd’s List Intelligence is a trading name of Maritime Insights & Intelligence Limited. Lloyd’s is the registered trademark of the Society Incorporated by the Lloyd’s Act 1871 by the name of Lloyd’s.
This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use. For high-quality copies or electronic reprints for distribution to colleagues or customers, please call UK support at +44 (0)20 3377 3996 / APAC support at +65 6508 2430
US nexus tankers branded ‘missile magnets’
PREMIUMS for seven-day war risk cover in the Middle East Gulf region are now up 10-fold on where they were before the US and Israeli attack on Iran and have more than doubled in the last week alone, according to market sources.
That said, there is a wide spectrum of pricing and safer vessels seem to be getting away with 1% of hull value or less, which is still a decent margin by normal standards.
However, feedback suggested that high-risk propositions were being quoted 7.5% yesterday and were almost certainly looking at 10% or more by the end of today (Wednesday, March 11).
Among those being asked for the most money are US nexus tankers, which have attracted the nickname of missile magnets.
“Interest in getting vessels through the Strait of Hormuz has picked up significantly this week,” said one Lloyd’s underwriter this morning.
“Quotes that had been put up last week are still live as owners assess the situation and find crew that are willing to run the gauntlet.”
By way of historical precedent, the typical rate applicable during the 1980s tanker war, when Iraq attacked 283 vessels and Iran 168 during their eight-year conflict, was about 5%.
There are apocryphal reports that 10% or even 20% was being asked for Black Sea in the immediate aftermath of the Russian invasion of Ukraine in February 2022, leaving some shipowners angry. Pricing subsided soon afterwards.
No, P&I clubs have not ‘cancelled war risk cover’ By David Osler 04 Mar 2026 Marine underwriters buckling down for protracted conflict Read the full article here
Marine underwriters buckling down for protracted conflict
Every war risk contract is bespoke and some quotes will inevitably be outliers or even examples of “go-away pricing”, deliberately inflated because the insurer doesn’t really want the business.
But quotes inevitably price in risk, and vessels with a perceived American, British or Israeli association are regarded as Tehran’s top targets. These ships can expect to pay three times more for Middle East war risk cover than other tonnage.
A hypothetical five-year-old VLCC on charter to US interests is currently worth around $138m. Indicatively, that suggests insurers could be looking for anything from $10m to $14m — to the charterer’s rather than owner’s account — to cover a voyage through the Strait of Hormuz.
Most market sources believe that premiums have farther to travel once underwriters factor in the string of attacks on ships in the region today, with the projectile strike on Precious bulker Mayuree Naree ( IMO: 9323649 ) being the most prominent. Three seafarers remain missing.
But most marine insurers resent that the widely reported claim that war risk cover in the Middle East Gulf has been cancelled or is otherwise unavailable.
This is incorrect ; it is very much still on offer from Lloyd’s, the London market and elsewhere, even if it is now necessarily hugely more expensive to reflect the hugely higher risk.
At least one major marine war risk underwriter is given all Middle East business a wide berth right now. However, contracts signed before the fighting were naturally honoured.
Chris Jones is chief executive of the International Underwriting Association , which represents the London companies market.
Three seafarers missing in Middle East Gulf strikes By Lloyd’s List 11 Mar 2026 The three vessels are thought to be owned by Star Bulk, MOL and Precious Shipping Read the full article here
The three vessels are thought to be owned by Star Bulk, MOL and Precious Shipping
“IUA members are continuing to provide cover for clients affected by the current hostilities in Iran across a number of lines of business,” he insisted.
“Trade has been halted, not by a lack of available insurance, but by obvious safety concerns. The market for marine war risks is operating in the manner we would expect.”
Hull war risk works on the basis of shipowners buying an annual baseline policy, usually for a premium of hundreds of thousands of dollars.
This protects them against such perils as unexpected wars, revolutions, terrorism, strikes riots and the catch-all term ‘civil commotions’.
But underwriters retain the right — but not the obligation — to charge an additional premium or AP for each transit through an area designated as high risk.
These can be as much as they see fit and are not infrequently waived altogether for favoured customers, particularly those who place hull business with the same firm.
Before Trump and Netanyahu launched their attack on Iran in late February, APs for MEG trips clustered in the 0.15% to 0.25% bracket. Premiums even seem to have been softening, thanks to the competitive pressures generated by excess capacity in the hull market.
Once underwriters got back to their desks the following Monday and took stock of the picture, the new benchmark quickly became 1%, with US, UK and Israeli-associated tonnage getting triple weighting . But the trend on pricing has only been one way since then.
“As of yesterday, rates were between 2.5%-7.5% depending on when they were quoted. Given the three attacks since yesterday evening, I’d expect that to move again today,” said one underwriter.
A rival underwriter went even further, contending that the market had fundamentally shifted in a matter of hours thanks to the increased intensity of the US and Israeli onslaught and the Iranian response.
“Rates from last night are almost certainly withdrawn. Rates today could be in the region of 10% minimum with many insurers likely to seek to control line size and exposure on any one risk.”
“Across the market we are seeing a number of states starting to discuss the escorting of vessels flagged, owned by or carrying cargo for the country in question. It remains to be seen whether this is tactically a viable option.”
A different take was on offer from Dylan Mortimer, hull war lead at broker Marsh . Mortimer said: “There is still considerable polarity in ratings offered, on average, ranging between 0.8%-1.5% with slight variation both upwards and downwards depending on specific risk factors.
“Transits of Hormuz appears to be the most challenging exposure to price due to proximity to Iran and the risks associated, while ports east of Hormuz, such as Sohar , are generally on the lighter side.”
A third underwriter said that static “plain vanilla” tonnage, perhaps alongside in the region waiting to see how things pan out but well away from the shooting, seconded the suggestion that quotes of 0.8% to 0.85% are still out there.
But Strait of Hormuz transits were fetching 2.5% in most instances and 5% for US/UK/Israeli nexus ships, he added.
Please Note: You can also Click below Link for Ask the Analyst Ask The Analyst
Your question has been successfully sent to the email address below and we will get back as soon as possible. my@email.address .
All set! This article has been sent to my@email.address .
All fields are required. For multiple recipients, separate email addresses with a semicolon.
Please Note: Only individuals with an active subscription will be able to access the full article. All other readers will be directed to the abstract and would need to subscribe.
Copyright © 2026 Maritime Insights & Intelligence Limited. Maritime Insights & Intelligence Limited is registered in England and Wales with company number 13831625 and address Maritime Insights & Intelligence Limited, 5th Floor, 10 St Bride Street, London, EC4A 4AD, United Kingdom. Lloyd’s List Intelligence is a trading name of Maritime Insights & Intelligence Limited. Lloyd’s is the registered trademark of the Society Incorporated by the Lloyd’s Act 1871 by the name of Lloyd’s.
This copy is for your personal, non-commercial use. For high-quality copies or electronic reprints for distribution to colleagues or customers, please call UK support at +44 (0)20 3377 3996 / APAC support at +65 6508 2430
Strait of Hormuz crisis Red Sea Risk Ukraine Crisis Decarbonisation Sanctions Digitalisation
Containers Dry Bulk Sustainability Tankers & Gas Ports & Logistics Technology & Innovation Crew Welfare Finance Insurance Law & Regulation Safety Piracy & Security
Containers Dry Bulk Sustainability Tankers & Gas Ports & Logistics Technology & Innovation
Crew Welfare Finance Insurance Law & Regulation Safety Piracy & Security
Daily Briefing Special Reports Podcasts & Video The Week in Charts The Week in Newbuildings Latest Market Outlook
One Hundred People 2025 One Hundred People 2025 - Top 10s One Hundred Container Ports 2025 One Hundred People 2024 One Hundred People 2024 - Top 10s Archive: One Hundred People Archive: One Hundred Ports Archive: Lloyd's List Magazine Archive: Future Of Shipping Archive: Shipping’s Global Boardroom
Markets Data Containers Data Hub Casualties Directories
Editorial Calendar Advertising & Sponsorship Sponsored Content Classified Webinars
Meet the Team Editorial Board RSS Feeds User Guide
Quotes for high-risk vessels could already be at 10% of hull value
But safer ‘plain vanilla’ propositions priced far lower
Rates almost certain to go higher still after Mayuree Naree strike
David Osler @finance_LL [email protected]