Title: The UAE's Future Roadmap | The Official Platform of the UAE ...
URL: https://u.ae/en/about-the-uae/uae-in-the-future/uae-future
Source Type: html
Domain: u.ae
Content Type: text/html; charset=utf-8
Search Query: UAE government climate adaptation infrastructure investment 2025 2026

The UAE's Future Roadmap | The Official Platform of the UAE Government

Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum Solar Park
Abu Dhabi Transportation Mobility Management Strategy
Dubai Autonomous Transportation Strategy
UAE Strategy for Artificial Intelligence
RAK Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Strategy 2040
Dubai Integrated Waste Management Strategy 2021-2041
Disclaimer: You are using Google Translate. The UAE mGovernment is not responsible for the accuracy of information in the translated language.
The UAE will have achieved Abu Dhabi Economic Vision 2030, Environment Vision 2030 (Abu Dhabi), Plan Abu Dhabi 2030, Abu Dhabi Transportation Mobility Management Strategy, Surface Transport Master Plan (Abu Dhabi), Dubai Autonomous Transportation Strategy, Dubai Industrial Strategy 2030, Dubai 3D Printing Strategy and UN’s 2030 Agenda.
In 2028, the UAE will launch its interplanetary mission, with the primary goal of exploring the asteroid belt between Mars and Jupiter. The spacecraft will undertake a 3.6 billion-kilometre, five-year journey. Its final landing will be on an asteroid, 560 million kilometres from Earth in 2033. This will make the Emirates, the fourth nation to land a spacecraft on an asteroid.
The Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum Solar Park is the largest single-site solar park in the world, based on the independent power producer (IPP) model. It will generate 1,000 Mega Watts (MW) by 2020 and 5,000 MW by 2030. The first phase of this project began operations in 2013 with a capacity of 13 MW. The second phase began operations in April 2017 with a capacity of 200 MW. The third phase will begin operations in 2020 with a capacity of 1,000 MW, while the fourth phase of the project will begin operations by the last quarter of 2020 with a capacity of 5,000 MW. The project will have the world’s tallest solar tower, measuring 260 metres.
The Government of Abu Dhabi announced a long-term plan for the transformation of the emirate's economy, including a reduced reliance on the oil sector as a source of economic activity over time and a greater focus on knowledge-based industries in the future. Entitled 'Abu Dhabi Economic Vision 2030', it identifies seven immediate economic priorities.
Environment Vision 2030 for the emirate of Abu Dhabi was developed to ensure integration among the three pillars of sustainability: environmental, economic and social vision. It aims to preserve and enhance Abu Dhabi's natural heritage in the efficient use of resources and contributing to a better quality of life for all. Environment Vision 2030 identifies 5 priority areas.
'Plan Abu Dhabi 2030 - Urban Structure framework Plan' was prepared by Abu Dhabi Urban Planning Council. The plan is designed to help Abu Dhabi Government filter and respond to current and future development needs, establish a planning culture and introduce strong guiding principles for new development. It provides conceptual solutions to shape the growth of Abu Dhabi over the next quarter of a century.
By 2030, Abu Dhabi Transportation Mobility Management Strategy (TMM) mainly aims to change attitude and behaviour towards use of sustainable modes of transport, improve access to public transport, satisfy mobility needs, reduce traffic growth and congestion and create an efficient multi-modal public transport network.
The core objective of Surface Transport Master Plan (STMP) is to deliver a world class, sustainable transport system that supports Abu Dhabi's economic, social and cultural and environmental goals. The environment goal of STMP is: Delivering world-leading performance in environmental sustainability by using resources responsibly, minimising pollution and preserving Abu Dhabi's unique environment.
Dubai Autonomous Transportation Strategy aims to transform 25 per cent of the total transportation in Dubai to autonomous mode by 2030. The strategy is expected to bring AED 22 billion in annual economic revenues in several sectors by reducing transportation costs, carbon emissions and accidents, and raising the productivity of individuals as well as saving hundreds of millions of hours wasted in conventional transportation.
In June 2016, Sheikh Mohammed launched Dubai Industrial Strategy 2030 to elevate Dubai into a global platform for knowledge-based, sustainable and innovation-focused businesses. Dubai Industrial Strategy is based on five key objectives that will serve as the foundation for Dubai's industrial future. Among other things, the Strategy aims to increase the total output and make Dubai a preferred manufacturing platform.
In April 2016, H. H. Sheikh Mohammed launched the Dubai 3D Printing Strategy. This initiative aims to exploit technology for the service of humanity and promote the status of the UAE and Dubai as a leading hub of 3D printing technology by the year 2030. There are three key sectors and five pillars of the strategy.
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) also known as Global Goals are a set of 17 goals that aim to provide better living conditions to all. The SDGs are based on the United Nations’ Millennium Development Goals. The SDGs are part of 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The UAE is taking several steps to achieve the SDGs at home and abroad.
The UAE will have achieved the UAE Energy Strategy 2050, the UAE Water Security Strategy 2036, Dubai Clean Energy Strategy under which 75 per cent of Dubai's energy will be generated from clean sources. The UAE will also have achieved Fujairah 2040 Plan.
The National Advanced Sciences Agenda 2031 outlines the UAE’s high priority for scientific objectives to be realised by 2031. The Agenda aims to utilise advanced sciences in the development and creation of solutions to future challenges and support the government's efforts to achieve the objectives of Vision 2021 and Centennial Plan 2071 through three consecutive strategies starting with 2021 Advanced Science Strategy.
Launched in 2017, the UAE Strategy for Artificial Intelligence (AI) is the first mega project to achieve the objectives of UAE Centennial 2071. It characterises the post-mobile government phase in which all future government services, sectors and infrastructure projects will rely on AI. The strategy is the first of its kind in the region and the world and it will see investments in the latest AI technologies and tools to enhance government performance and efficiency. By 2031, the UAE will achieve 100 per cent reliance on AI for government services and data analysis. (Image source:Khaleej Times)
‘We the UAE 2031’ vision aims to double the country’s gross domestic product (GDP) from AED 1.49 trillion to AED 3 trillion. It represents a national plan to shape the future of the country for the next 10 years, with focus on social, economic, investment and development aspects. The plan seeks to enhance the position of the UAE as a global partner and an attractive and influential economic hub. It aims to highlight the successful economic model of the UAE and the opportunities it provides to all global partners.
Dubai Economic Agenda aims to double the size of Dubai’s economy by 2033 and consolidate its position among the top three global cities. It includes 100 transformative projects, with targets to increase foreign trade to AED 25.6 trillion and adding 400 cities as key trading partners over the next decade.
By 2036, the UAE aims to reduce the total demand for water resources by 21 per cent, increase the water productivity index to USD 110 per cubic metre, reduce the water scarcity index by a ratio of three points, increase the reuse of treated water to 95 per cent and increase the national water storage capacity up to two days. Sustainable water supplies will be ensured in various circumstances through three main programmes: The Water Demand Management Program, the Water Supply Management Program and the Emergency Production and Distribution Programme.
Fujairah 2040 Plan focuses on enhancing the housing and transportation infrastructure facilities. The municipality has begun work on road improvements, building water barriers, ports and residential complexes and expanding healthcare facilities at the cost of AED 1.5 billion. The Fujairah seaport would have new terminals for oil, marine services, dry bulk and containers with an anchorage area.
Ras Al Khaimah Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Strategy 2040 targets 30 per cent energy savings, 20 per cent water savings and production of renewable energy to the extent of 20 per cent of total energy sources by 2040. Ras Al Khaimah Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Strategy 2040 is a part of Ras Al Khaimah’s efforts to mitigate the impact of climate change in the UAE and the world.
The ‘Dubai 2040 Urban Master Plan’ has a strategic structural layout, integrating all urban development master plans in the emirate and aligning it with Dubai’s strategic economic priorities and the needs of the future. By 2040, Dubai will double in size, its green and recreational spaces; nature reserves and rural natural areas will constitute 60 per cent of the emirate’s total